PREAMBLE
In order to obtain the full benefit of home rule granted by the Constitution of
the State of California; to improve the quality of urban life; to encourage the
participation of all persons and all sectors in the affairs of the City and
County; to enable municipal government to meet the needs of the people
effectively and efficiently; to provide for accountability and ethics in public
service; to foster social harmony and cohesion; and to assure equality of
opportunity for every resident:
We, the people of the City and County of San Francisco, ordain and establish
this Charter as the fundamental law of the City and County.
ARTICLE I:
EXISTENCE AND POWERS OF THE CITY AND COUNTY 
SEC. 1.100. NAME AND BOUNDARIES.
   The City and County of San Francisco shall continue as a consolidated City
and County with such boundaries as are prescribed by law, pursuant to this
Charter and the laws of the State of California.
SEC. 1.101. RIGHTS AND POWERS.
   The City and County of San Francisco may make and enforce all ordinances and
regulations in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to the restrictions
and limitations provided in this Charter. The City and County may make and
enforce within its limits all local police, sanitary and other ordinances and
regulations. The City and County may appear, sue and defend in all courts in
all matters and proceedings.
   All rights and powers of a City and County which are not vested in another
officer or entity by this Charter shall be exercised by the Board of
Supervisors.
ARTICLE II:
LEGISLATIVE BRANCH
SEC. 2.100. COMPOSITION AND SALARY.
   The Board of Supervisors shall consist of eleven members elected by
district.
   The office of Board of Supervisors member is a full time position. The Civil
Service Commission shall set the Supervisors' salary once every five years.
Before the Commission determines the Supervisors' salary, it shall conduct and
consider a salary survey of other full time California City Councils and County
Boards of Supervisors and it may consider the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
   The Civil Service Commission shall timely transmit its determination of the
Supervisors' salary to the Controller, so that funds can be set aside for that
purpose. The Controller shall include the Civil Service Commission's
determination in appropriate budget documents to insure implementation. This
determination may not be changed except by the Civil Service Commission.
   The Civil Service Commission shall establish dates for an appropriate five-
year cycle for making the determinations required by this Section, in order to
efficiently coordinate with City budget processes and related procedures. In
order to institute this five-year cycle the initial determination may be for
less than a five-year period, as determined by the Civil Service Commission.
   If the City and employee organizations agree to amend the compensation
provisions of existing memoranda of understanding to reduce costs, the Civil
Service Commission shall review and amend the Supervisors' salary as necessary
to achieve comparable cost savings in the affected fiscal year or years.
   The provisions of this Section shall apply, notwithstanding any other
provision of this Charter.
(Amended November 1996; June 1998; November 2002)
SEC. 2.101. TERM OF OFFICE.
   Each member of the Board of Supervisors shall be elected at a general
election and shall serve a four-year term commencing on the eighth day in
January following election and until a successor qualifies. The respective
terms of office of the members of the Board of Supervisors in effect on the
date this Charter is adopted shall continue.
   No person elected or appointed as a Supervisor may serve as such for more
than two successive four-year terms. Any person appointed, elected, or any
combination thereof to the office of Supervisor to complete in excess of two
years of a four-year term shall be deemed, for the purpose of this section, to
have served one full term. No person having served two successive four-year
terms may serve as a Supervisor, either by election or appointment, until at
least four years after the expiration of the second successive term in office.
Any Supervisor who resigns with less than two full years remaining until the
expiration of the term shall be deemed, for the purposes of this section, to
have served a full four-year term.
(Amended by Proposition D, Approved 11/6/2012)
SEC. 2.103. MEETINGS.
   The Board of Supervisors shall meet at the legislative chambers in City Hall
at 12:00 noon on the eighth day in January in each odd-numbered year.
Thereafter, regular meetings shall be held on such dates and at such times as
shall be fixed by resolution.
   The meetings of the Board shall be held in City Hall, provided that, in case
of emergency, the Board, by resolution, may designate some other appropriate
place as its temporary meeting place.
   Notice of any special meeting shall be published at least 24 hours in
advance of such special meeting.
   The Board of Supervisors, by motion, may schedule special meetings of the
Board in locations in San Francisco other than City Hall. Notice of special
meetings being convened outside of City Hall shall be published and posted in
City Hall at least 15 days in advance of such special meetings. Motions to
schedule special meetings of the Board in locations in San Francisco other than
City Hall shall first be introduced and referred to a committee of the Board
for hearing and consideration.
   The Board of Supervisors, by motion, may authorize a committee of the Board
of Supervisors to schedule a special meeting of the committee of the Board in a
location in San Francisco other than City Hall. Notice of special committee
meetings being convened outside of City Hall shall be published and posted in
City Hall at least 15 days in advance of such special meetings.
   The Board of Supervisors, in consultation with the Mayor, shall provide by
ordinance for rules and guidelines governing the conduct of appearances by the
Mayor under Section
3.100(7).
(Proposition C, Approved 11/2/2010)
SEC. 2.104. QUORUM.
   (a)   The presence of a majority of the members of the Board of Supervisors
at a regular or special meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business. The term "presence" shall include participation by
teleconferencing or other electronic means as authorized by Government Code
Section 54953(b) or any successor legislation after the Board of Supervisors
has adopted an ordinance pursuant to subsection (c) allowing such participation
when the member is physically unable to attend in person, as certified by a
health care provider, due to the member's pregnancy, childbirth, or related
condition. The Board of Supervisors may also, as part of a parental leave
policy adopted pursuant to subsection (c), authorize a member to participate in
meetings by teleconferencing or other electronic means when the member is
absent to care for his or her child after birth of the child, or after
placement of the child with the member or the member's immediate family for
adoption or foster care. In the absence of a quorum, a smaller number of
members may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and under the
penalties established by the Board of Supervisors.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors shall act by a majority, two-thirds, three-
fourths, or other vote of all members of the Board. Each member present at a
regular or special meeting shall vote "yes" or "no" when a question is put,
unless excused from voting by a motion adopted by a majority of the members
present.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Charter Section
10.101, the Board of Supervisors shall adopt parental leave policies for its
members, including, but not limited to, authorization to participate in
meetings by teleconferencing or other electronic means pursuant to subsection
(a) and subject to the restrictions listed in that subsection.
(Amended by Proposition B, Approved 11/7/2006)
SEC. 2.105. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors shall meet and transact its business according to
rules which it shall adopt.
   The Board of Supervisors shall act only by written ordinance or resolution,
except that it may act by motion on matters over which the Board of Supervisors
has exclusive jurisdiction. All legislative acts shall be by ordinance. An
ordinance or resolution may be introduced before the Board of Supervisors by a
member of the Board, a committee of the Board or the Mayor, and shall be
referred to and reported upon by an appropriate committee of the Board. An
ordinance or resolution may be prepared in committee and reported out to the
full Board for action, consistent with the public notice laws of the City.
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, passage of an ordinance or a
resolution shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of
the Board.
   An ordinance shall deal with only one subject matter, except that
appropriations ordinances may cover appropriations with respect to any number
of subjects. The title of each ordinance shall clearly reflect the content of
the ordinance.
   Except as otherwise provided in Section
2.107, passage of an ordinance shall require two readings at separate meetings
of the Board of Supervisors, which shall be held at least five days apart. If
an ordinance is amended at its second reading, the ordinance shall require a
further reading prior to final passage. Resolutions shall require only one
reading and may be adopted upon introduction without reference to committee by
unanimous affirmative vote of the members of the Board of Supervisors who are
present, but in no event less than a quorum.
   All ordinances shall take effect no sooner than 30 days following the date
of passage except for ordinances not subject to referendum and those
authorizing bonded indebtedness and lease financings, which shall take effect
immediately. Ordinances granting franchises shall take effect no sooner than 60
days after passage. No ordinance granting a franchise may be passed within 90
days of its introduction. Resolutions may take effect immediately upon passage,
or at such other time as shall be specified in the resolutions.
SEC. 2.106. VETO OVERRIDE.
   The Board of Supervisors may enact an ordinance or resolution which has been
vetoed by the Mayor pursuant to Section
3.103 if, within 30 days after such veto, not less than two-thirds of the Board
of Supervisors shall vote in favor of such measure, except as provided in
Section
9.104. If a larger vote is required for the adoption of the measure by
provisions of this Charter, such larger vote shall be required to overcome the
veto of the Mayor.
SEC. 2.107. EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.
   An emergency ordinance may be passed in cases of public emergency affecting
life, health, property, or for the uninterrupted operation of any City or
County department or office required to comply with time limitations as
established by law. Emergency ordinances shall require only one reading, and
the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the Board of Supervisors shall be
required for the passage of an emergency ordinance.
   The form and manner of introduction of an emergency ordinance shall be as
required for ordinances generally. In addition, an emergency ordinance shall
contain:
   1.   A declaration setting forth the existence of the emergency;
   2.   A clear and concise description thereof; and
   3.   An explanation of how the measures in the ordinance will address the
emergency.
   An emergency ordinance shall be effective upon passage and shall
automatically terminate on the 61st day following passage. An emergency
ordinance may be reenacted upon the same terms and conditions applicable to its
initial enactment. Any appropriation contained in an emergency ordinance shall
be deemed to be an amendment to the final appropriations ordinance.
   An emergency ordinance may suspend specific sections of this Charter, but
may not: levy taxes; grant, renew or extend a franchise; regulate the rate
charged by any public utility for its services; set salaries; issue bonds; or
buy, sell or lease land.
SEC. 2.108. PUBLIC'S RIGHT TO KNOW.
   The Board of Supervisors shall adopt and maintain a Sunshine Ordinance to
liberally provide for the public's access to their government meetings,
documents and records.
   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall keep a permanent public record
of the proceedings of the Board showing all action considered and taken, the
text of ordinances and resolutions voted upon and the vote of each member of
the Board regarding any matter before the Board. The Clerk of the Board shall
cause the text of all ordinances or resolutions passed by the Board to be
readily available to the public.
   A written calendar of the business scheduled for each meeting of the Board
of Supervisors or any standing or special committee comprised of Board members
and established by the Board shall be prepared and available to the public
before each meeting. Summaries of board and committee calendar items of general
public interest, as determined by the Clerk of the Board, and a statement of
where and when copies of proposed ordinances and resolutions may be obtained,
shall be published commencing at least 36 hours before the commencement time of
each regular meeting and at least 18 hours before the commencement time of each
special meeting.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, or by ordinance, notice of the
title or the purport and subject matter of each proposed ordinance which is
introduced and referred to committee shall be published within five days after
its presentation to the board and a copy of such proposed ordinance shall be
kept available for inspection in the office of the Clerk of the Board. Each
ordinance required to be included in the municipal code shall be printed
promptly after final passage, and copies shall be made available to the public.
   All ordinances, after final passage or upon their becoming effective shall
be certified by the Clerk of the Board and recorded in a book kept for that
purpose, and resolutions adopted shall be certified and recorded in a like
manner. Notice that an ordinance has been passed for second reading, that an
ordinance has been finally passed, and that a resolution has been adopted,
together with a statement of where copies may be obtained, shall be published
once within five days of such passage for second reading, final passage, or
adoption.
SEC. 2.109. RATES, FEES AND SIMILAR CHARGES.
   Within 30 days of submission by the Mayor, the Board of Supervisors shall
approve by ordinance or reject any rate, fee or similar charge to be imposed by
any department, official, board or commission, except those rates, fees and
similar charges established by the Port or Airport Commissions, or under the
Refuse Collection and Disposal Ordinance of November 8, 1932, as amended.
SEC. 2.112. FIDELITY BONDS.
   The Board of Supervisors shall determine which officials of the City and
County shall be required to post fidelity bonds and the respective amounts of
any such bonds. An annual review of bonding requirements shall be conducted by
the Board of Supervisors.
SEC. 2.113. LEGISLATIVE INITIATIVE.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors, or four or more members, may submit to the
voters declarations of policy, and any matter which the Board of Supervisors is
empowered to pass.
   Upon approval of a declaration of policy by the voters, the Board of
Supervisors shall within 90 days of such approval take such actions within
their powers as shall be necessary to carry such declaration into effect. A
special municipal election shall not be called with respect to a declaration of
policy.
   (b)   In order to submit a proposed initiative measure to the voters under
this section or Section
3.100(15)
*, four or more members of the Board of Supervisors or the Mayor shall submit
the proposed initiative to the Board of Supervisors no later than 45 days prior
to the deadline for the submission of such initiatives to the Department of
Elections. The proponent or proponents shall clearly identify the measure as a
proposed initiative to be submitted at a specific election, and the proponent
or proponents shall file a copy of the measure with the Department of Elections
at the same time as the measure is submitted to the Board of Supervisors.
   The President of the Board of Supervisors shall assign the measure to a
committee of the Board, and the committee shall conduct a public hearing on the
measure at least 15 days prior to the deadline for the submission of such
initiatives to the Department of Elections.
   Failure by the Board of Supervisors to hold a hearing on the measure prior
to the Department of Elections' deadline for submittal of legislative or
mayoral initiatives shall not prevent the Director of Elections from placing
the initiative on the ballot. But the Director of Elections shall include a
notice in the voter information pamphlet that the measure was not the subject
of the required public hearing.
   The proponent or proponents of an initiative measure may withdraw the
proposed measure at any time prior to the Department of Elections' deadline for
submission of such initiatives, subject to any requirements of the Municipal
Elections Code or other City ordinance. If a measure is withdrawn, the Board of
Supervisors is not required to conduct a hearing on the measure.
(Amended by Proposition C, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 2.114. NON-INTERFERENCE IN ADMINISTRATION.
   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Board of Supervisors shall deal with
the administrative service for which the City Administrator is responsible
solely through such officer, and for administrative or other functions for
which elective officials or boards or commissions are responsible solely
through the elective official, the board or commission or the chief executive
officer of such board or commission concerned, or their designees.
   Neither the Board of Supervisors, its committees, nor any of its members,
shall have any power or authority, nor shall they dictate, suggest or interfere
with respect to any appointment, promotion, compensation, disciplinary action,
contract or requisition for purchase or other administrative actions or
recommendations of the City Administrator or of department heads under the City
Administrator or under the respective boards and commissions. The Board of
Supervisors shall deal with administrative matters only in the manner provided
by this Charter, and any dictation, suggestion or interference herein
prohibited on the part of any Supervisor shall constitute official misconduct;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall restrict the power of
hearing and inquiry as provided in this Charter.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, it shall not
constitute prohibited interference for a member of the Board of Supervisors to
testify regarding administrative matters other than specific contract and
personnel decisions at a public meeting of a City board, commission, task force
or other appointive body, or for the Board of Supervisors to adopt legislation
regarding administrative matters other than specific contract and personnel
decisions.
   Violation of this section shall constitute official misconduct.
SEC. 2.115. FINANCIAL AUDIT.
   The Board of Supervisors shall select a firm or firms of independent
accountants to audit and report upon the annual financial statements of the
City and County.
SEC. 2.116. PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS.
   At its regular meeting on the eighth day of January in odd-numbered years,
the Board of Supervisors shall by majority vote elect one of its members as
President for a two-year term. If a vacancy in the office of President of the
Board of Supervisors shall occur prior to the end of the term, the Board of
Supervisors shall by majority vote elect one of its members to fill the
unexpired portion of the term. The President shall preside at all meetings,
appoint all standing and special committees, assign legislation to committees,
and have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Board of
Supervisors.
(Amended November 1996)
SEC. 2.117. OFFICES OF THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS.
   The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Clerk of the Board. The Clerk of
the Board shall have charge of the office and records of the Board and its
committees and its classified staff. The Clerk shall keep a public record of
the proceedings of the board as provided by Section
2.108 of this Charter and shall keep properly indexed files of all ordinances
and resolutions. The Clerk shall be responsible for the publication, as
required by law, of ordinances, resolutions and other matters acted on by the
Board for which publication is specified. The Clerk shall have such other
duties and responsibilities as the Board of Supervisors may prescribe.
   The Board of Supervisors shall appoint and may remove a Budget Analyst and
such appointment shall be made solely on the basis of qualifications by
education, training and experience for the position to be filled. The Budget
Analyst shall be responsible for such duties as the Board of Supervisors shall
prescribe.
(Amended by Proposition B, Approved 11/5/2009)
ARTICLE III:
EXECUTIVE BRANCH – OFFICE OF MAYOR
SEC. 3.100. POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer and the official
representative of the City and County, and shall serve full time in that
capacity. The Mayor shall devote his or her entire time and attention to the
duties of the office, and shall not devote time or attention to any other
occupation or business activity. The Mayor shall enforce all laws relating to
the City and County, and accept service of process on its behalf.
   The Mayor shall have responsibility for:
      1.   General administration and oversight of all departments and
governmental units in the executive branch of the City and County;
      2.   Coordination of all intergovernmental activities of the City and
County;
      3.   Receipt and examination of complaints relating to the administration
of the affairs of the City and County, and timely delivery of notice to the
complainant of findings and actions taken;
      4.   Assurance that appointees to various governmental positions with the
City and County are qualified and are as representative of the communities of
interest and diverse population of the City and County as is reasonably
practicable, and are representative of both sexes;
      5.   Submission of ordinances and resolutions by the executive branch for
consideration by the Board of Supervisors;
      6.   Presentation before the Board of Supervisors of a policies and
priorities statement setting forth the Mayor's policies and budget priorities
for the City and County for the ensuing fiscal year;
      7.   Appearance, in person, at one regularly-scheduled meeting of the
Board of Supervisors each month to engage in formal policy discussions with
members of the Board;
      8.   Introduction before the Board of Supervisors of the annual proposed
budget or multi-year budget which shall be initiated and prepared by the Mayor.
The Mayor shall seek comments and recommendations on the proposed budget from
the various commissions, officers and departments; and
      9.   Preparation of and introduction to the Board of Supervisors of
supplemental appropriations.
   The Mayor shall have the power to:
      10.   Speak and be heard with respect to any matter at any meeting of the
Board of Supervisors or any of its committees, and shall have a seat but no
vote on all boards and commissions appointed by the Mayor;
      11.   As provided in Section
3.103 of this Charter, veto any ordinance or resolution passed by the Board of
Supervisors;
      12.   Subject to the fiscal provisions of this Charter and budgetary
approval by the Board of Supervisors, appoint such staff as may be needed to
perform the duties and carry out the responsibilities of the Mayor's office,
provided that no member of the staff shall receive a salary in excess of
seventy percent of that paid the Mayor. For purposes of this provision, staff
does not include the City Administrator, department heads or employees of
departments placed under his or her direction by Section
3.104. Notwithstanding any other provisions or limitations of this Charter to
the contrary, the Mayor may not designate nor may the City and County employ on
the Mayor's behalf any person to act as deputy to the Mayor or any similar
employment classification, regardless of title, whose responsibilities include
but are not necessarily limited to supervision of the administration of any
department for which the City Administrator, an elected official other than the
Mayor or an appointed board or commission is assigned responsibility elsewhere
in this Charter;
      13.   Designate a member of the Board of Supervisors to act as Mayor in
the Mayor's absence from the state or during a period of temporary disability;
      14.   In the case of an emergency threatening the lives, property or
welfare of the City and County or its citizens, the Mayor may direct the
personnel and resources of any department, command the aid of other persons,
and do whatever else the Mayor may deem necessary to meet the emergency;
         In meeting an emergency, the Mayor shall act only with the concurrence
of the Board of Supervisors, or a majority of its members immediately available
if the emergency causes any member of the Board to be absent. The Mayor shall
seek the Board's concurrence as soon as is reasonably possible in both the
declaration of an emergency and in the action taken to meet the emergency.
Normal notice, posting and agenda requirements of the Board of Supervisors
shall not be applicable to the Board's actions pursuant to these provisions;
      15.   Make an appointment to fill any vacancy in an elective office of
the City and County until a successor shall have been elected;
      16.   Subject to the provisions of Charter Section
2.113, submit to the voters a declaration of policy or ordinance on any matter
on which the Board of Supervisors is empowered to pass;
      17.   Have and exercise such other powers as are provided by this Charter
or by law for the chief executive officer of a City and County;
      18.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, make appointments to boards
and commissions which shall be effective immediately and remain so, unless
rejected by a two-thirds vote of the Board of Supervisors within 30 days
following transmittal of Notice of Appointment. The Notice of Appointment shall
include the appointee's qualifications to serve and a statement how the
appointment represents the communities of interest, neighborhoods and diverse
populations of the City and County;
      19.   Appoint department heads subject to the provisions of this Charter;
and
      20.   Prepare and submit schedule of rates, fees and other similar
charges to the Board of Supervisors.
(Amended by Proposition C, Approved 11/6/2007; Proposition C, Approved 11/2/
2010)
SEC. 3.101. TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Mayor shall serve a four-year term. No person shall serve as mayor for
more than two successive terms. A part of a term that exceeds two years shall
count as a full term. There shall be no limit on the non- successive terms that
a person may serve.
SEC. 3.102. ABSENCE FROM STATE OR TEMPORARY DISABILITY.
   If the Mayor is absent from the state or temporarily disabled without
designating an Acting Mayor, the President of the Board of Supervisors shall
act as Mayor until such time as the Mayor shall return to office.
   In case of a disaster in which neither the Mayor nor the President of the
Board of Supervisors is able to serve as Mayor, the order of succession shall
be as designated by ordinance.
(Amended November 2001)
SEC. 3.103. VETO POWER.
   Any ordinance or resolution passed by the Board of Supervisors shall be
promptly delivered to the Mayor for consideration. If the Mayor approves the
ordinance or resolution, the Mayor shall sign it and it shall become effective
as provided in Section
2.105 of this Charter. If the Mayor disapproves the ordinance or resolution,
the Mayor shall promptly return it to the Board of Supervisors without the
Mayor's signature, accompanied by a statement indicating the reasons for
disapproval and any recommendations which the Mayor may have. Any ordinance or
resolution so disapproved by the Mayor shall become effective only if,
subsequent to its return, it shall be passed by a vote of the Board of
Supervisors required by Section
2.106 of this Charter. Any ordinance or resolution shall become effective, with
or without the Mayor's signature, unless it is disapproved by the Mayor and
returned to the Board of Supervisors not more than ten days after the date the
ordinance or resolution was delivered to the Mayor's Office for consideration.
SEC. 3.104. CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor shall appoint or reappoint a City Administrator, subject to
confirmation by the Board of Supervisors. The appointee shall have at least ten
years' governmental management or finance experience with at least five years
at the City, County, or City and County level. The City Administrator shall
have a term of office of five years, and may be removed by the Mayor subject to
approval by the Board of Supervisors.
   The City Administrator shall have responsibility for:
      1.   Administrative services within the executive branch, as assigned by
the Mayor or by ordinance;
      2.   Administering policies and procedures regarding bonded or other
long-term indebtedness, procurement, contracts and building and occupancy
permits, and for assuring that all contracts and permits are issued in a fair
and impartial manner and that any inspections involved with the issuance of
permits shall be carried out in a like manner;
      3.   Coordinating all capital improvement and construction projects
except projects solely under the Airport, Port, Public Utilities and Public
Transportation Commissions;
      4.   Preparing and recommending bond measures for consideration by the
Mayor and Board of Supervisors; and
      5.   Administering, budgeting and control of publicity and advertising
expenditures.
   The City Administrator shall have power to:
      6.   With the concurrence of the Mayor, appoint and remove the directors
of the Departments of Administrative Services, Solid Waste, and Public
Guardian/Administrator, and such other department heads which are placed under
the City Administrator’s direction;
      7.   Propose rules governing procurement and contracts to the Board of
Supervisors for consideration;
      8.   Award contracts without interference from the Mayor or Board of
Supervisors; and
      9.   Coordinate the issuance of bonds and notes for capital improvements,
equipment and cash flow borrowings, except for projects solely under the
Airport, Port, Public Utilities and Public Transportation Commissions.
In those instances where contract awards are not subject to Board of
Supervisors' review, the City Administrator shall award contracts in full
compliance with applicable laws and this Charter. The City Administrator's
decision in such cases shall be final.
(Amended by Proposition_B, Approved 11/3/2020)
SEC. 3.105. CONTROLLER; CITY SERVICES AUDITOR.
   (a)   The Mayor shall appoint or reappoint a Controller for a ten-year term,
subject to confirmation by the Board of Supervisors. The Controller may only be
removed by the Mayor for cause, with the concurrence of the Board of
Supervisors by a two-thirds vote.
   (b)   The Controller shall be responsible for the timely accounting,
disbursement or other disposition of monies of the City and County in
accordance with sound financial practices applicable to municipalities and
counties. The Controller shall have the power and duties of a County auditor,
except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The Controller shall have
authority to audit the accounts and operations of all boards, commissions,
officers and departments to evaluate their effectiveness and efficiency. The
Controller shall have access to, and authority to, examine all documents,
records, books and other property of any board, commission, officer or
department.
   (c)   The Controller shall also serve as City Services Auditor for the City
and County. As City Services Auditor, the Controller shall be responsible for
monitoring the level and effectiveness of services rendered by the City to its
residents, as set forth in
Appendix F to this Charter.
   (d)   Should the Controller determine at any time during the fiscal year
that the revenues of the General Fund, or any special, sequestered or other
fund are insufficient or appear to be insufficient to support the remaining
anticipated expenditure from that fund for the fiscal year for any department,
function or program, the Controller shall reduce or reserve all or a portion of
the expenditure appropriation until such time as the Controller determines that
the anticipated revenues for the remainder of that fiscal year are sufficient
to support the level of expenditure anticipated for the remainder of the fiscal
year. Whenever the Controller makes a reduction or reservation, the Controller
shall so inform the Mayor and Board of Supervisors within 24 hours.
   (e)   The Controller shall exercise general supervision over the accounts of
all officers, commissions, boards and employees of the City and County charged
in any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement of City and County
funds or other funds, in their capacity as City and County officials or
employees. The Controller shall establish accounting records, procedures and
internal controls with respect to all financial transactions of the City and
County. Such records, procedures and controls shall permit the financial
statements of the City and County to be prepared in conformity with generally
accepted accounting principles applicable to municipalities and counties.
   (f)   The Controller shall within 150 days of the end of each fiscal year
prepare an annual report of the financial condition of the City and County.
Such annual report shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. The annual report shall contain such information and
disclosures as shall be necessary to present to the public a full and
understandable report of all City and County financial activity.
   (g)   The Controller shall prepare an impartial financial analysis of each
City and County ballot measure which shall include the amount of any increase
or decrease in the cost of government of the City and County and its effect
upon the cost of government. Such analysis shall be issued in sufficient time
to permit inclusion in the voters' pamphlet.
   (h)   The Controller shall issue from time to time such periodic or special
financial reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Board of Supervisors.
   (i)   All disbursements of funds in the custody of the Treasurer must be
authorized by the Controller. No officer or employee shall bind the City and
County to expend money unless there is a written contract or other instrument
and unless the Controller shall certify that sufficient unencumbered balances
are available in the proper fund to meet the payments under such contract or
other obligation as these become due, or that he or she expects sufficient
unencumbered balances to be available in the proper fund during the course of
the budgetary cycle to meet the payments as they become due.
(Amended November 2003; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
ARTICLE IV:
EXECUTIVE BRANCH – BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS
SEC. 4.100. GENERAL.
   In addition to the office of the Mayor, the executive branch of the City and
County shall be composed of departments, appointive boards, commissions and
other units of government. To the extent law permits, each appointive board,
commission, or other unit of government of the City and County established by
State or Federal law shall be subject to the provisions of this Article and
this Charter.
SEC. 4.101. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS – COMPOSITION
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, the composition of each
appointive board, commission, or advisory body of any kind established by this
Charter or legislative act of the United States of America, the State of
California, or the Board of Supervisors shall be broadly representative of the
communities of interest, neighborhoods, and the diversity of the City and
County in ethnicity, race, age, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, and
types of disabilities.
   (b)   All members of such bodies as described in subsection (a) shall be
residents of the City and County and the minimum age required to vote in
municipal elections in the City and County, at all times during the term of
their respective offices, unless otherwise specifically provided in this
Charter. Either or both of the requirements set forth in the first sentence of
this subsection (b) shall not apply to boards, commissions, or advisory bodies
established by legislative act if the legislation specifically exempts the
position from either or both requirements, or if the appointing officer or
entity makes a finding that a person meeting both requirements, and willing to
serve, could not be located.
   (c)   It shall be the official City policy that the composition of each
appointive board, commission, or advisory body of any kind established by this
Charter or legislative act of the United States of America, the State of
California, or the Board of Supervisors shall reflect the interests and
contributions of people of all races, ethnicities, ages, sexes, gender
identities, sexual orientations, and types of disabilities. The voters
therefore urge in the strongest terms all City officers and agencies involved
in nominating, appointing, or confirming members of those appointive boards,
commissions, or advisory bodies to consider and as appropriate support the
nomination, appointment, or confirmation of women, people of color, seniors,
people with disabilities, and people that reflect a range of sexual
orientations and gender identities to fill seats on those bodies.
   (d)   The Commission on the Status of Women shall conduct an analysis of
appointments to appointive boards, commissions, and advisory bodies established
in the Charter or by legislative act, in the second and fourth year of each
mayoral term to track the diversity of appointments to such bodies. This
analysis, to be based only on voluntary disclosures, shall include ethnicity,
sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, disability status, and any other
relevant demographic qualities.
   (e)   Vacancies on appointive boards, commissions, or other units of
government shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term in the manner
prescribed by this Charter or ordinance for initial appointments.
   (f)   Terms of office shall continue as they existed on the effective date
of this Charter.
(Amended by Proposition D, 6/3/2008; Proposition_C, Approved 11/3/2020)
SEC. 4.101.1. PROHIBITION ON BOARD MEMBERS AND COMMISSIONERS SEEKING ELECTIVE
OFFICE.
   (a)   Any member of a board, commission, or other body established by this
Charter, other than a citizen advisory committee, shall immediately forfeit his
or her seat on the board, commission, or body upon filing a declaration of
candidacy for any State elective office, any elective office referenced in
Section
13.101, or the Bay Area Rapid Transit Board of Directors.
   (b)   This Section
4.101.1 shall not apply to members of boards, commissions, or other bodies who
hold elective offices referenced in Section
13.101 of this Charter, including insofar as the elected official serves on
another board, commission, or other body established by this Charter. This
Section
4.101.1 also shall not apply to elected members of bodies established by
Article XII of this Charter.
(Added by Proposition_B, Approved 6/5/2018)
SEC. 4.101.5. HOLD-OVER SERVICE BY BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   (a)   Application of this Section. Unless otherwise provided in this Charter
or required by law, the requirements of this Section shall apply to the members
of each appointive board, commission, or other unit of government of the
executive branch of the City and County or otherwise created in the Charter
("Charter Commission"). Citizen advisory committees created in the Charter
shall not be considered Charter Commissions for purposes of this Section. The
provisions of this Section shall not apply to boards or commissions created in
Article V (Executive Branch – Arts and Culture) or
Article XII (Employee Retirement and Health Service Systems) of this Charter.
   (b)   Limitations on Hold-Over-Service. Except as otherwise provided in this
Charter, the tenure of a member of any Charter Commission shall terminate no
later than 60 days after the expiration of the member's term, unless the member
is re-appointed. A member may not serve as a hold-over member of a Charter
Commission for more than 60 days after the expiration of his or her term. The
tenure of any person sitting as a hold-over member on the effective date of
this amendment shall terminate no later than 60 days after the effective date
of this amendment.
(Added by Proposition B, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 4.102. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS – POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, each appointive board, commission
or other unit of government of the executive branch of the City and County
shall:
   1.   Formulate, evaluate and approve goals, objectives, plans and programs
and set policies consistent with the overall objectives of the City and County,
as established by the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors through the adoption
of City legislation;
   2.   Develop and keep current an Annual Statement of Purpose outlining its
areas of jurisdiction, authorities, purpose and goals, subject to review and
approval by the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors;
   3.   After public hearing, approve applicable departmental budgets or any
budget modifications or fund transfers requiring the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, subject to the Mayor's final authority to initiate, prepare and
submit the annual proposed budget on behalf of the executive branch and the
Board of Supervisors' authority under Section
9.103;
   4.   Recommend to the Mayor for submission to the Board of Supervisors
rates, fees and similar charges with respect to appropriate items coming within
their respective jurisdictions;
   5.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, submit to the Mayor at least
three qualified applicants, and if rejected, to make additional nominations in
the same manner, for the position of department head, subject to appointment by
the Mayor;
   6.   Remove a department head; the Mayor may recommend removal of a
department head to the commission, and it shall be the commission's duty to act
on the Mayor's recommendation by removing or retaining the department head
within 30 days; failure to act on the Mayor's recommendation shall constitute
official misconduct;
   7.   Conduct investigations into any aspect of governmental operations
within its jurisdiction through the power of inquiry, and make recommendations
to the Mayor or the Board of Supervisors;
   8.   Exercise such other powers and duties as shall be prescribed by the
Board of Supervisors; and
   9.   Appoint an executive secretary to manage the affairs and operations of
the board or commission.
   In furtherance of the discharge of its responsibilities, an appointive
board, commission or other unit of government may:
   10.   Hold hearings and take testimony; and
   11.   Retain temporary counsel for specific purposes, subject to the consent
of the Mayor and the City Attorney.
   Each board or commission, relative to the affairs of its own department,
shall deal with administrative matters solely through the department head or
his or her designees, and any dictation, suggestion or interference herein
prohibited on the part of any member of a board or commission shall constitute
official misconduct; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall
restrict the board or commission's powers of hearing and inquiry as provided in
this Charter.
SEC. 4.103. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS – ANNUAL REPORT.
As of the operative date of this Charter and until this requirement is changed
by the Board of Supervisors, each board and commission of the City and County
shall be required by ordinance to prepare an annual report describing its
activeties, and shall file such report with the Mayor and the Clerk of the
Board of Supervisors. The Annual Report can be included in the Annual Statement
of Purpose as provided for in Section
4.102(2).
SEC. 4.104. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS – RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, each appointive board,
commission or other unit of government of the executive branch of the City and
County shall:
      1.   Adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter and
ordinances of the City and County. No rule or regulation shall be adopted,
amended or repealed, without a public hearing. At least ten days' public notice
shall be given for such public hearing. All such rules and regulations shall be
filed with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
      2.   Hold meetings open to the public and encourage the participation of
interested persons. Except for the actions taken at closed sessions, any action
taken at other than a public meeting shall be void. Closed sessions may be held
in accordance with applicable state statutes and ordinances of the Board of
Supervisors.
      3.   Keep a record of the proceedings of each regular or special meeting.
Such record shall indicate how each member voted on each question. These
records, except as may be limited by state law or ordinance, shall be available
for public inspection.
   (b)   The presence of a majority of the members of an appointive board,
commission or other unit of government shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business by such body. The term "presence" shall include
participation by teleconferencing or other electronic means as authorized by
Government Code Section 54953(b) or any successor legislation after the Board
of Supervisors has adopted an ordinance pursuant to subsection (c) allowing
such participation when the member is physically unable to attend in person, as
certified by a health care provider, due to the member's pregnancy, childbirth,
or related condition. The Board of Supervisors may also, as part of a parental
leave policy adopted pursuant to subsection (c), authorize a member of a board
or commission to participate in meetings by teleconferencing or other
electronic means when the member is absent to care for his or her child after
birth of the child, or after placement of the child with the member or the
member's immediate family for adoption or foster care. Unless otherwise
required by this Charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of the members
shall be required for the approval of any matter, except that the rules and
regulations of the body may provide that, with respect to matters of procedure
the body may act by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present,
so long as the members present constitute a quorum. All appointive boards,
commissions or other units of government shall act by a majority, two-thirds,
three-fourths or other vote of all members. Each member present at a regular or
special meeting shall vote "yes" or "no" when a question is put, unless excused
from voting by a motion adopted by a majority of the members present.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Charter Section
10.101, the Board of Supervisors shall provide by ordinance for parental leave
policies for members of appointive boards, commissions or other units of
government, including, but not limited to, authorization to participate in
meetings by teleconferencing or other electronic means pursuant to subsection
(b) and subject to the restrictions listed in that subsection.
(Amended by Proposition B, Approved 11/7/2006)
SEC. 4.105. PLANNING COMMISSION.
   GENERAL. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members nominated
and appointed pursuant to this section. Four of the members shall be nominated
by the Mayor, and three of the members shall be nominated by the President of
the Board of Supervisors. Charter Section
4.101 shall apply to these appointments, with particular emphasis on the
geographic diversity of City neighborhoods. Vacancies shall be filled by the
appointing officer.
   Each nomination of the Mayor and the President of the Board of Supervisors
is subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, and shall be the subject of
a public hearing and vote within 60 days. If the Board fails to act on the
nomination within 60 days of the date the nomination is transmitted to the
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, the nominee shall be deemed approved. The
appointment shall become effective on the date the Board adopts a motion
approving the nomination or after 60 days of the date the nomination is
transmitted to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   Members may be removed by the appointing officer only pursuant to Section
15.105.
   In order to stagger the terms, three members shall initially serve two-year
terms, and four members shall initially service four-year terms. The initial
two and four-year terms of office shall be instituted as follows:
   1.   The respective terms of office of members of the Planning Commission
who hold office on the first day of July, 2002, shall expire at 12 o'clock noon
on that date, and the four members appointed by the Mayor and the three members
appointed by the President of the Board of Supervisors shall succeed to said
offices at that time.
   2.   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall determine by lot which two
of the four Mayoral appointees shall serve an initial two-year term, and which
one of the three appointees of the President of the Board of Supervisors shall
serve an initial two-year term. The remaining appointees shall serve four-year
terms. All subsequent terms shall be four years.
   The Commission shall provide the Mayor with at least three qualified
candidates for Director of Planning, selected on the basis of administrative
and technical qualifications, with special regard for experience, training and
knowledge in the field of City planning.
   The Commission may contract with consultants for such services as it may
require subject to the fiscal provisions of this Charter.
   GENERAL PLAN. The Commission shall periodically recommend to the Board of
Supervisors for approval or rejection proposed amendments to the General Plan.
If the Board of Supervisors fails to act within 90 days of receipt, the
proposed General Plan or amendments shall be deemed approved. The General Plan
which will initially consist of the Master Plan in effect immediately prior to
the effective date of this Charter shall consist of goals, policies and
programs for the future physical development of the City and County that take
into consideration social, economic and environmental factors. In developing
their recommendations, the Commission shall consult with commissions and
elected officials, and shall hold public hearings as part of a comprehensive
planning process. The Planning Department, in consultation with other
departments and the City Administrator, shall periodically prepare special
area, neighborhood and other plans designed to carry out the General Plan, and
periodically prepare implementation programs and schedules which link the
General Plan to the allocation of local, state and federal resources. The
Planning Department may make such other reports and recommendations to the
Mayor, Board of Supervisors and other offices and governmental units as it may
deem necessary to secure understanding and a systematic effectuation of the
General Plan.
   In preparing any plans, the Planning Department may include plans for
systems and areas within the Bay Region which have a planning relationship with
the City and County.
   REFERRAL OF CERTAIN MATTERS. The following matters shall, prior to passage
by the Board of Supervisors, be submitted for writ ten report by the Planning
Department regarding conformity with the General Plan:
   1.   Proposed ordinances and resolutions concerning the acquisition or
vacation of property by, or a change in the use or title of property owned by,
the City and County;
   2.   Subdivisions of land within the City and County;
   3.   Projects for the construction or improvement of public buildings or
structures within the City and County;
   4.   Project plans for public housing, or publicly assisted private housing
in the City and County;
   5.   Redevelopment project plans within the City and County; and
   6.   Such other matters as may be prescribed by ordinance.
   The Commission shall disapprove any proposed action referred to it upon a
finding that such action does not conform to the General Plan. Such a finding
may be reversed by a vote of two-thirds of the Board of Supervisors.
   All such reports and recommendations shall be issued in a manner and within
a time period to be determined by ordinance.
   PERMITS AND LICENSES. All permits and licenses dependent on, or affected by,
the City Planning Code administered by the Planning Department shall be
approved by the Commission prior to issuance. The Commission may delegate this
approval function to the Planning Department. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
certificates of appropriateness for work to designated landmarks and historic
districts and applications for alterations to significant or contributory
buildings or properties in designated conservation districts that have been
approved, disapproved, or modified by the Historic Preservation Commission
shall not require approval by the Commission prior to issuance.
   ENFORCEMENT. The Planning Department shall administer and enforce the City
Planning Code.
   ZONING AMENDMENTS. The Commission may propose for consideration by the Board
of Supervisors ordinances regulating or controlling the height, area, bulk,
set-back, location, use or related aspects of any building, structure or land.
An ordinance proposed by the Board of Supervisors concerning zoning shall be
reviewed by the Commission. Applications for the reclassification of property
may be made by interested parties and must be reviewed by the Commission.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, designation of a landmark, a significant or
contributory building, an historic district, or a conservation district shall
be reviewed by the Commission only as provided in Section
4.135.
   Notwithstanding the Commission's disapproval of a proposal from the Board of
Supervisors or the application of interested parties, the Board of Supervisors
may adopt the proposed ordinance; however, in the case of any proposal made by
the application of interested parties, any such adoption shall be by a vote of
not less than two-thirds of the Board of Supervisors.
   No application of interested parties proposing the same or substantially the
same ordinance as that disapproved by the Commission or by the Board of
Supervisors shall be resubmitted to or reconsidered by the Commission within a
period of one year from the effective date of final action upon the earlier
application.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Director of Planning shall appoint a Zoning
Administrator from a list of qualified applicants provided pursuant to the
Civil Service provisions of the Charter. The Zoning Administrator shall be
responsible for the determination of all zoning variances. The administrator
shall have the power to grant only those variances that are consistent with the
general purpose and the intent of the zoning ordinance, and in accordance with
the general and specific rules of the zoning ordinance, subject to such
conditions and safeguards as the Zoning Administrator may impose. The power to
grant variances shall be applied only when the plain and literal interpretation
and enforcement of the zoning ordinance would result in practical difficulties,
unnecessary hardships or where the results would be inconsistent with the
general purpose of the zoning ordinance. Decisions of the Zoning Administrator
regarding zoning variances may be appealed to the Board of Appeals.
   Before any such variance may be granted, there shall appear, and the Zoning
Administrator shall specify in his or her findings, the facts in each case
which shall establish:
   (a)   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applying to the property involved or to the intended use of the
property that do not apply generally to the property or class of uses in the
same district or zone;
   (b)   That owning to such exceptional or extraordinary circumstances the
literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship not created by or attributable to the
applicant or the owner of the property;
   (c)   That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of
a substantial property right of the applicant, possessed by other property in
the same zone and vicinity;
   (d)   That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental
to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in such zone
or district in which the property is located; and
   (e)   That the granting of such variance will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance and will not adversely affect the
general plan.
   The determination of the Zoning Administrator shall be final except that
appeals therefrom may be taken, as hereinafter provided, to the Board of
Appeals, exclusively and notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter,
by any person aggrieved or by any office, agency, or department of the City and
County. An appeal from a determination of the Zoning Administrator shall be
filed with the Board of Appeals within ten days from the date of such
determination. Upon making a ruling or determination upon any matter under his
or her jurisdiction, the Zoning Administrator shall thereupon furnish a copy
thereof to the applicant and to the Director of Planning. No variance granted
by the Zoning Administrator shall become effective until ten days thereafter.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from.
   CONDITIONAL USE. The Commission shall have the power to hear and decide
conditional use applications. An appeal may be taken to the Board of
Supervisors from a decision of the Commission to grant or deny a conditional
use application. The Board of Supervisors may disapprove the decision of the
Commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Board.
(Amended March 2002; Amended by Proposition J, 11/4/2008)
SEC. 4.106. BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (a)   The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members nominated and
appointed pursuant to this section. Three of the members shall be nominated by
the Mayor, and two of the members shall be appointed by the President of the
Board of Supervisors. Charter Section
4.101 shall apply to these appointments. Vacancies shall be filled by the
appointing officer.
      Each nomination of the Mayor and the President of the Board of
Supervisors is subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, and shall be
the subject of a public hearing and vote within 60 days. If the Board fails to
act on the nomination within 60 days of the date the nomination is transmitted
to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, the nominee shall be deemed approved.
The appointment shall become effective on the date the Board adopts a motion
approving the nomination or after 60 days of the date the nomination is
transmitted to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
      Members may be removed by the appointing officer only pursuant to Section
15.105.
      In order to stagger the terms, three members shall initially serve two-
year terms, and two members shall initially service four-year terms. The
initial two and four-year terms of office shall be instituted as follows:
      1.   The respective terms of office of members of the Board of Appeals
who hold office on the first day of July, 2002, shall expire at 12 o'clock noon
on that date, and the three members appointed by the Mayor and the two members
appointed by the President of the Board of Supervisors shall succeed to said
offices at that time.
      2.   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall determine by lot which
two of the three Mayoral appointees shall serve an initial two-year term, and
which one of the two appointees of the President of the Board of Supervisors
shall serve an initial two-year term. The remaining appointees shall serve
four-year terms. All subsequent terms shall be four years.
      The Board shall appoint and may remove an executive secretary, who shall
serve as department head.
   (b)   The Board shall hear and determine appeals with respect to any person
who has been denied a permit or license, or whose permit or license has been
suspended, revoked or withdrawn, or who believes that his or her interest or
the public interest will be adversely affected by the grant, denial, suspension
or revocation of a license or permit, except for a permit or license under the
jurisdiction of the Recreation and Park Commission or Department, or the Port
Commission, or a building or demolition permit for a project that has received
a permit or license pursuant to a conditional use authorization.
   (c)   The Board of Appeals shall hear and determine appeals:
      1.   Where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator
in the enforcement of the provisions of any ordinance adopted by the Board of
Supervisors creating zoning districts or regulating the use of property in the
City and County; or
      2.   From the rulings, decisions and determinations of the Zoning
Administrator granting or denying applications for variances from any rule,
regulation, restriction or requirement of the zoning or set-back ordinances, or
any section thereof. Upon the hearing of such appeals, the Board may affirm,
change, or modify the ruling, decision or determination appealed from, or, in
lieu thereof, make such other additional determinations as it shall deem proper
in the premises, subject to the same limitations as are placed upon the Zoning
Administrator by this Charter or by ordinance.
   (d)   After a hearing and any necessary investigation, the Board may concur
in the action of the department involved, or by the affirmative vote of four
members (or if a vacancy exists, by a vote of three members) overrule the
action of the Department.
      Where the Board exercises its authority to modify or overrule the action
of a department, the Board shall state in summary its reasons in writing.
(Amended March 2002)
SEC. 4.107. HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.
   The Human Rights Commission shall consist of eleven members appointed by the
Mayor, pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. Members may be removed by the Mayor.
   The Commission shall:
   1.   Investigate complaints of unlawful discrimination against any person;
   2.   Ensure the civil rights of all persons;
   3.   Ensure that the affirmative action plans of each department of the City
and County are current and are being properly implemented; and report on the
implementation of such affirmative action plans to the Mayor and Board of
Supervisors;
   4.   Promote understanding among the residents of the City and County and
work cooperatively with governmental agencies, community group and others to
eliminate discrimination and the results of past discrimination by furnishing
information, guidance and technical assistance;
   5.   Study, investigate, mediate and make recommendations with respect to
the solving of community- wide problems resulting in intergroup tensions and
discrimination;
   6.   Implement the provisions of ordinances prohibiting discrimination in
all contracts and subsequent subcontracts, franchises, leases, concessions or
other agreements for or on behalf of the City and County; and
   7.   Issue such rules and regulations for the conduct of its business, and
prepare such ordinances with respect to human rights for consideration by the
Board of Supervisors as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this
section.
   In performing its duties, the Commission may hold hearings, issue subpoenas
to require witnesses to appear and require the production of evidence,
administer oaths, take testimony and issue appropriate orders and petitions for
court orders in such manner as may be prescribed by law.
SEC. 4.108. FIRE COMMISSION.
   The Fire Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor,
pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. Members may be removed by the Mayor. In addition to
any other powers set forth in this Charter, the Fire Commission is empowered to
prescribe and enforce any reasonable rules and regulations that it deems
necessary to provide for the efficiency of the Department, provided that the
civil service and ethics provisions of this Charter shall control in the event
of any conflict with rules adopted under this section.
(Amended November 2003)
SEC. 4.109. POLICE COMMISSION.
   The Police Commission shall consist of seven members appointed pursuant to
this section. The Mayor shall nominate four members to the commission, at least
one of whom shall be a retired judge or an attorney with trial experience. The
Rules Committee of the Board of Supervisors, or any successor committee
thereto, shall nominate three other members to the commission. Each nomination
shall be subject to confirmation by the Board of Supervisors, and the Mayor's
nominations shall be the subject of a public hearing and vote within 60 days.
If the Board of Supervisors rejects the Mayor's nomination to fill the seat
designated for a retired judge or attorney with trial experience, the Mayor
shall nominate a different person with such qualifications. If the Board of
Supervisors fails to act on a mayoral nomination within 60 days of the date the
nomination is transmitted to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, the nominee
shall be deemed confirmed. Appointments to fill a vacancy on the commission
shall become operative on the date the Board of Supervisors adopts a motion
confirming the nomination, or on the 61st day following the date a mayoral
nomination is transmitted to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors if the Board
of Supervisors fails to vote on the nomination prior to such date.
Confirmations of nominations to fill a vacancy that will be created upon the
expiration of a sitting member's term shall become operative upon the
expiration of the sitting member's term, or, if the Board of Supervisors fails
to act on a mayoral nomination to fill such anticipated vacancy, on the 61st
day following the date the nomination was transmitted to the Clerk of the Board
of Supervisors or on the expiration of the sitting member's term, whichever
occurs later. The terms and tenures of all members sitting on the commission as
of the effective date of the amendments to this section approved at the
November 2003 election shall terminate at 12 noon on April 30, 2004. To stagger
the terms of the seven members thereafter, of the first four members nominated
by the Mayor, two members shall serve terms of two years and two members shall
serve terms of four years, and of the three members nominated by the Rules
Committee, one member shall serve a term of one year, one member shall serve a
term of two years, and one member shall serve a term of three years. The Clerk
of the Board of Supervisors shall designate such initial terms by lot. All
subsequent appointments to the commission shall be for four-year terms.
   The tenure of each member shall terminate upon the expiration of the
member's term. The Mayor shall transmit a nomination or renomination to the
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors no later than 60 days prior to the expiration
of the term of a member nominated by the Mayor. For vacancies occurring for
reasons other than the expiration of a member's term, within 60 days following
the creation of such vacancy, the Mayor shall nominate a member to fill such
vacancy if the vacancy is for a seat filled by nomination of the Mayor.
   The District Attorney, Sheriff and Public Defender may recommend persons to
the Mayor and Board of Supervisors for nomination or appointment to the Police
Commission.
   The Mayor, with the consent of the Board of Supervisors, may remove a member
the Mayor has nominated. The Board of Supervisors may remove a member the Rules
Committee has nominated.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Charter, the Chief of Police may
be removed by the Commission or the Mayor, acting jointly or separately of each
other. In addition to any other powers set forth in this Charter, the Police
Commission is empowered to prescribe and enforce any reasonable rules and
regulations that it deems necessary to provide for the efficiency of the
Department, provided that the civil service and ethics provisions of this
Charter shall control in the event of any conflict with rules adopted under
this section.
(Amended November 2003)
SEC. 4.110. HEALTH COMMISSION.
   The Health Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor,
pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. The Commission shall have less than a majority of
direct care providers. Members may be removed by the Mayor only pursuant to
Section
15.105. The Commission shall control the property under its jurisdiction.
   The Commission and the Department shall manage and control the City and
County hospitals, emergency medical services, and in general provide for the
preservation, promotion and protection of the physical and mental health of the
inhabitants of the City and County, except where the Charter grants such
authority to another officer or department. The Commission and the Department
may also determine the nature and character of public nuisances and provide for
their abatement.
SEC. 4.111. HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION.
   The Human Services Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the
Mayor, pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. Members may be removed by the Mayor only pursuant
to Section
15.105.
SEC. 4.112. PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION.
   (a)   The Public Utilities Commission shall consist of five members
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the Board of
Supervisors. Each of the members shall serve for a term of four years. Members
may be removed by the Mayor only pursuant to Section
15.105.
   (b)   Seat 1 on the Commission shall be a member with experience in
environmental policy and an understanding of environmental justice issues. Seat
2 shall be a member with experience in ratepayer or consumer advocacy. Seat 3
shall be a member with experience in project finance. Seat 4 shall be a member
with expertise in water systems, power systems, or public utility management,
and Seat 5 shall be an at-large member.
   (c)   The respective terms of office of members of the Public Utilities
Commission who old office on August 1, 2008 shall expire at noon on that date,
and the members appointed pursuant to the amendments to this Section approved
at the June 2008 election shall succeed to said office at that time. In order
to provide for staggered terms, the members appointed to Seats 2 and 4 shall
serve for an initial term of two years from August 1, 2008. The remaining three
members appointed to Seats 1, 3, and 5 shall serve for an initial term of four
years from August 1, 2008, and thereafter the terms of all members shall be
four years.
   (d)   The Commission shall have charge of the construction, management,
supervision, maintenance, extension, operation, use and control of all water
and energy supplies and utilities of the City as well as the real, personal and
financial assets, which are under the Commission's jurisdiction on the
operative date of this Charter, or assigned pursuant to Section
4.132.
(Amended by Proposition E, Election 6/3/2008)
SEC. 4.113. RECREATION AND PARK COMMISSION.
   The Recreation and Park Commission shall consist of seven members appointed
by the Mayor, pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. Members may be removed by the Mayor only pursuant
to Section
15.105.
   Pursuant to the policies and directives set by the Commission and under the
direction and supervision of the General Manager, the Recreation and Park
Department shall manage and direct all parks, playgrounds, recreation centers
and all other recreation facilities, avenues and grounds under the Commission's
control or placed under its jurisdiction thereafter, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this Charter.
   The Department shall promote and foster a program providing for organized
public recreation of the highest standard.
   The Department shall issue permits for the use of all property under the
Commission's control, pursuant to the policies established by the Commission.
   As directed by the Commission, the Department shall administer the Park,
Recreation and Open Space Fund pursuant to Section
16.107 of this Charter.
   The Department shall have the power to construct new parks, playgrounds,
recreation centers, recreation facilities, squares and grounds, and to erect
and maintain buildings and structures on parks, playgrounds, square, avenues
and grounds, except as follows:
   1.   No building or structure, except for nurseries, equipment storage
facilities and comfort stations, shall be erected, enlarged or expanded in
Golden Gate Park or Union Square Park unless such action has been approved by a
vote of two-thirds of the Board of Supervisors;
   2.   No park land may be sold or leased for non-recreational purposes, nor
shall any structure on park property be built, maintained or used for non-
recreational purposes, unless approved by a vote of the electors. However, with
permission of the Commission and approval by the Board of Supervisors,
subsurface space under any public park, square or playground may be used for
the operation of a public automobile parking station under the authority of the
Department of Parking and Traffic, provided that the Commission determines that
such a use would not be, in any material respect or degree, detrimental to the
original purpose for which a park, square or playground was dedicated or in
contravention of the conditions of any grant under which a park, square or
playground might have been received. The revenues derived from any such use,
less the expenses incurred by the Department of Parking and Traffic in
operating these facilities, shall be credited to Recreation and Park Department
funds.
   3.   The Commission shall have the power to lease or rent any stadium or
recreation field under its jurisdiction for athletic contests, exhibitions and
other special events and may permit the lessee to charge an admission fee.
(Amended March 2000)
SEC. 4.114. PORT COMMISSION.
   The Port Commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the Board of Supervisors.
Each of the members shall serve for a term of four years. They shall be subject
to recall, suspension and removal in the same manner as an elected official.
   The Commission shall have the composition and organization, and the powers,
duties and responsibilities with respect to the Port that are set forth in the
Burton Act, Statutes of 1968, Chapter 1333, as amended, and in the Agreement
Relating to the Transfer of the Port of San Francisco from the State of
California to the City and County, executed on the 24th day of January 1969.
   The Commission shall be subject to the provisions of Sections
4.101 through
4.103 of this Charter, so far as those powers and duties are not inconsistent
with the Burton Act and the Transfer Agreement as they are referred to in the
above paragraph.
SEC. 4.115. AIRPORT COMMISSION.
   The Airport Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor,
pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. Members may be removed by the Mayor only pursuant
to Section
15.105.
   The Commission shall provide the Mayor with at least three qualified
candidates for Director of Airports, related on the basis of executive,
administrative and technical qualifications.
   The Commission shall have charge of the construction, management,
supervision, maintenance, extension, operation, use and control of all
property, as well as the real, personal and financial assets which are under
the Commission's jurisdiction.
   Subject to the approval, amendment or rejection of the Board of Supervisors
of each issue, the Commission shall have exclusive authority to plan and issue
revenue bonds for airport-related purposes.
SEC. 4.117. ENTERTAINMENT COMMISSION.
   The San Francisco Entertainment Commission shall consist of seven members
nominated and appointed pursuant to this section. The Mayor shall nominate four
members to the commission, and the Board of Supervisors shall appoint, by
motion, three other members to the commission. Each nomination of the Mayor
shall be subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, and shall be the
subject of a public hearing and vote within 60 days. If the Board of Supervises
fails to act on a mayoral nomination within 60 days of the date the nomination
is transmitted to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, the nominee shall be
deemed approved. Appointments to the commission shall become effective on the
date the Board of Supervisors adopts a motion approving the nomination or on
the 61st day following the date the mayoral nomination was transmitted to the
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors if the Board of Supervisors fails to act upon
the nomination prior to such date.
   Of the four members nominated by the Mayor, the Mayor shall nominate one
member to represent the interests of City neighborhood associations or groups,
one member to represent the interests of entertainment associations or groups,
one member to represent the interests of the urban planning community, and one
member to represent the interests of the law enforcement community. Of the
three members of the commission appointed by the Board of Supervisors, one
member shall represent the interests of City neighborhood associations or
groups, one member shall represent the interests of entertainment associations
or groups, and one member shall represent the interests of the public health
community.
   To stagger the terms of the members, the initial appointments to the
commission shall be as follows: the Mayor shall nominate two members to serve
terms of four years, one member to serve a term of three years, and one member
to serve a term of two years. Of the three remaining members of the commission,
the Board of Supervisors shall appoint one member to serve a term of four
years, one member to serve a term of three years, and one member to serve a
term of two years. Except for appointments to fill a vacancy, all subsequent
appointments shall be for a term of four years.
   Members of the commission nominated by the Mayor may be suspended by the
Mayor and removed by the Board of Supervisors only as set forth in Section
15.105. Members of the commission appointed directly by the Board of
Supervisors may be suspended by a motion of the Board of Supervisors approved
by six votes and may be removed by the Board of Supervisors only as set forth
in Section
15.105.
(Added November 2002)
SEC. 4.118. COMMISSION ON THE ENVIRONMENT.
   The Commission on the Environment shall consist of seven members appointed
by the Mayor, pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. Members may be removed by the Mayor.
   The Department of the Environment shall regularly produce an assessment of
San Francisco's environmental condition. It shall also produce and regularly
update plans for the long-term environmental sustainability of San Francisco.
   Pursuant to the policies and directives set by the Commission, and under the
supervision and direction of the department head, the Department shall manage
the environmental programs, duties and functions assigned to it pursuant to
Section
4.132 or by ordinance.
   The Commission shall have the authority to review and make recommendations
on any policy proposed for adoption by any City agency regarding conformity
with the long-term plans for environmental sustainability, except for those
regarding building and land use.
   The Commission may investigate and make recommendations to all City agencies
related to operations and functions, such as:
   1.   Solid waste management;
   2.   Recycling;
   3.   Energy conservation;
   4.   Natural resource conservation;
   5.   Environmental inspections;
   6.   Toxics;
   7.   Urban forestry and natural resources;
   8.   Habitat restoration; and
   9.   Hazardous materials.
   The Commission shall conduct public education and outreach to the community
on environmental issues, including, but not limited to each of the categories
listed above.
SEC. 4.119. COMMISSION ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN.
   The Commission on the Status of Women shall consist of seven members.
Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor, pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. Members may be removed by the Mayor only pursuant
to Section
15.105. The Commission shall develop and recommend policies and practices for
the City and County to reduce the particular impacts on women and girls of
problems such as domestic violence, sexual harassment, employment and health
care inequity, and homelessness, as well as advocate on behalf of women and
girls in such areas. The Commission may be assigned additional duties and
functions by ordinance or pursuant to Section
4.132.
SEC. 4.120. DISABILITY AND AGING SERVICES COMMISSION.
   (a)   The Disability and Aging Services Commission shall consist of seven
members appointed by the Mayor, pursuant to Section 3.100, for four-year terms.
Members may be removed by the Mayor. The Commission shall oversee the
Department of Disability and Aging Services, including the functions of the
Public Guardian/Administrator, as well as carry out any additional duties and
functions assigned to the Commission by ordinance or pursuant to Section
4.132.
   (b)   As of January 15, 2020, Seat 1 on the Commission shall be held by a
person who is 60 years old or older; Seat 2 shall be held by a person with a
disability, as defined under the Americans With Disabilities Act, who is 18
years old or older; and Seat 3 shall be held by a person who served in the
United States military and who was discharged or released under conditions
other than dishonorable. Seats 4, 5, 6, and 7, shall have no required
qualifications in addition to those set forth in Section
4.101.
   (c)   For the purpose of calculating the terms of particular seats on the
Commission, Seats 1, 2, and 3 are hereby designated as the seats with terms
ending on January 15, 2020. Notwithstanding Charter Section
4.101.5, members in those seats who do not as of January 15, 2020 hold the
qualifications set forth in subsection (b) respectively may no longer serve in
those seats.
(Amended by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016; Proposition_B, Approved 11/5/
2019)
SEC. 4.121. BUILDING INSPECTION COMMISSION.
   The Building Inspection Commission shall consist of seven members nominated
and appointed pursuant to this Section 4.121 and with an emphasis on seeking to
include members concerned with tenant safety and habitability issues. Four
members shall be nominated by the Mayor for a term of two years. Three members
shall be nominated by the President of the Board of Supervisors for a term of
two years. Two of the four Mayoral appointments shall each have one or more of
the following qualifications: be an active, formerly active, or retired
structural engineer, architect, or residential builder. One of the three Board
President appointments shall have one or more of the following qualifications:
be a residential tenant or work or have worked for a non-profit housing
organization.
   Each nomination of the Mayor and the President of the Board of Supervisors
is subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, and shall be the subject of
a public hearing and vote within 60 days. If the Board fails to act on the
nomination within 60 days of the date the nomination is transmitted to the
Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, the nominee shall be deemed approved. The
appointment shall become effective on the date the Board adopts a motion
approving the nomination or after 60 days of the date the nomination is
transmitted to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors. Members may be removed by
the appointing officer only pursuant to Section 15.105. Vacancies occurring in
the offices of members, shall be nominated and appointed in accordance with the
appointment process specified in this paragraph.
   The Building Inspection Commission shall have responsibility for oversight
of the Department of Building Inspection, which shall have responsibility for
the enforcement, administration, and interpretation of the San Francisco
Housing, Building, Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing Codes, except where
this Charter specifically grants that power to another department.
   The Commission shall oversee the inspection and regulation of additions,
alterations, and repairs in all buildings and structures covered by the San
Francisco Housing, Building, Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing Codes.
However, nothing in this Section 4.121 shall diminish or alter the jurisdiction
of the Planning Commission or Department over changes of use or occupancy under
the Planning Code. The Commission shall ensure the provision of minimum
standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and the public welfare
by regulating and controlling the safe use of such buildings and structures.
The Commission shall ensure the vigorous enforcement of City laws mandating the
provision of heat and hot water to residential tenants. The Commission shall
also ensure the enforcement of local, state, and federal disability access
laws. The Commission shall exercise all the powers and duties of boards and
commissions set forth in Sections 4.102, 4.103, and 4.104, and may take other
actions as prescribed by ordinance. The members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation.
   The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with fulfilling
its responsibilities under this Charter. The Commission shall also adopt rules
and regulations governing Commission meetings and also adopt requirements for
notification and mailing for Commission business. The Commission shall hold
public hearings on all proposed amendments to the San Francisco Building Code,
Electrical Code, Housing Code, Plumbing Code, and Mechanical Code.
   The Commission shall constitute the Abatement Appeals Board, and shall
assume all powers granted to this entity under this Charter and the San
Francisco Building Code. The Commission shall appoint and may remove at its
pleasure members of the Board of Examiners, Access Appeals Commission, and Code
Advisory Committee, all of which shall have the powers and duties to the extent
set forth in the San Francisco Building Code.
   The Commission may reverse, affirm, or modify determinations made by the
Department of Building Inspection on all permits required for a final
certificate of completion. The Commission’s jurisdiction under this paragraph,
however, shall not extend to permits appealable to the Planning Commission or
Board of Appeals. Appeals of decisions within the Commission’s jurisdiction
must be filed with the Commission within fifteen days of the challenged
determination. The Commission’s action shall be final.
(Amended by Proposition_B, Approved 6/7/2022)
SEC. 4.122. YOUTH COMMISSION.
   There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Youth Commission
(hereinafter called "Commission") to advise the Board of Supervisors and Mayor
on issues relating to children and youth. The Commission shall operate under
the jurisdiction of the Board of Supervisors.
SEC. 4.123. YOUTH COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERMS; MEETINGS;
COMPENSATION; DIRECTOR.
   (a)   Commission Membership. The Commission shall consist of seventeen (17)
voting members, each of whom shall be between the ages of 12 and 23 years at
the time of appointment. Each member of the Board of Supervisors and the Mayor
shall appoint one member to the Commission. The Mayor shall also appoint five
(5) members from underrepresented communities to ensure that the Commission
represents the diversity of the City. All appointments shall be completed by
the sixtieth day after the effective date of this charter amendment and by that
date of each year thereafter. Commission members shall serve at the pleasure of
their appointing authorities.
      The Commission shall consist of individuals who have an understanding of
the needs of young people in San Francisco, or experience with children and
youth programs or youth organizations, or involvement with school or community
activities. The members shall represent the diversity of ethnicity, race,
gender and sexual orientation of the people of the City and County, and shall
be residents of the City and County.
   (b)   Term of Office. Members shall serve a term of one year. The first one
year term for all members shall begin upon the date the Clerk of the Board of
Supervisors certifies that all members of the Commission have been appointed
following the adoption of this charter amendment. Future terms of office shall
begin on that date of each successive year. Members shall conduct the first
meeting of the Commission within thirty days of the appointment of all members.
      In the event a vacancy occurs during the term of office of any voting
member, a successor shall be appointed to complete the unexpired term of the
office vacated in a manner similar to that which the member was initially
appointed.
   (c)   Removal of Members. Any member whom the Commission certifies to have
missed three regularly scheduled meetings of the Commission in any six month
period without prior authorization of the Commission shall be deemed to have
resigned from the Commission effective on the date of the written certification
from the Commission.
   (d)   Compensation. Members of the Commission shall not be compensated, nor
shall they be reimbursed for expenses.
   (e)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at least once a month.
   (f)   Minutes of Meetings. The Commission shall prepare and maintain
permanent minutes of the actions taken during its meetings, and shall file
copies with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors.
   (g)   Bylaws. To aid in the orderly conduct of business, the Commission
shall have the authority to create, amend, and repeal its own code of bylaws.
SEC. 4.124. YOUTH COMMISSION – PURPOSE AND DUTIES.
   The purpose of the Commission is to collect all information relevant to
advising the Board of Supervisors and Mayor on the effects of legislative
policies, needs, assessments, priorities, programs, and budgets concerning the
children and youth of San Francisco. Before the Board of Supervisors takes
final action on any matter that primarily affects children and youth of the
City and County, the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors shall refer the matter
to the Commission for comment and recommendation. The Commission shall provide
any response it deems appropriate within 12 days of the date the Board of
Supervisors referred the matter to the Commission. After the 12 day period has
elapsed, the Board of Supervisors may act on the matter whether or not the
Board has received a response. This referral requirement shall not apply to any
matter where immediate action by the Board of Supervisors is necessary to
protect the public interest. The Commission shall have the following duties and
functions:
   (a)   Identify the concerns and needs of the children and youth of San
Francisco; examine existing social, economic, educational, and recreational
programs for children and youth; develop and propose plans that support or
improve such programs; and make recommendations thereon to the Mayor and Board
of Supervisors.
   (b)   Identify the unmet needs of San Francisco's children and youth through
personal contact with these young people, school officials, church leaders, and
others; and hold public forums in which both youth and adults are encouraged to
participate.
   (c)   Elicit the interest, support, and mutual cooperation of private groups
(such as fraternal orders, service clubs, associations, churches, businesses,
and youth organizations) and City-wide neighborhood planning collaborative
efforts for children, youth and families that initiate and sponsor
recommendations that address the social, economic, educational, and
recreational needs of children and youth in San Francisco. Advise the Board of
Supervisors and Mayor about how such recommendations could be coordinated in
the community to eliminate duplication in cost and effort.
   (d)   Advise about available sources of governmental and private funding for
youth programs.
   (e)   Submit recommendations to the Mayor and Board of Supervisors about
juvenile crime prevention, job opportunities for youth, recreational activities
for teenagers, opportunities for effective participation by youth in the
governmental process, and changes in City and County regulations that are
necessary to improve the social, economic, educational, and recreational
advantages of children and youth.
   (f)   Respond to requests for comment and recommendation on matters referred
to the Commission by officers, departments, agencies, boards, commissions and
advisory committees of the City and County.
   (g)   Report to the Board of Supervisors the activities, goals, and
accomplishments of the Commission by July 1 of each calendar year, effective
July 1, 1997.
SEC. 4.125. JURISDICTION.
   The Commission shall be under the jurisdiction of the Board of Supervisors;
the Commission shall have only those powers created by Sections
4.122 through
4.125 or by ordinance of the Board of Supervisors.
SEC. 4.126. DEPARTMENTS – GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the responsibilities of each
department within the executive branch shall be prescribed by ordinance.
   The administration and management of each department within the executive
branch shall be the responsibility of the department head. Such officials may:
   1.   Appoint qualified individuals to fill all positions within their
departments which are exempt from the Civil Service provisions of this Charter;
   2.   Adopt rules and regulations governing matters within the jurisdiction
of their respective departments, subject, if applicable, to Section
4.102; and
   3.   With the approval of the City Administrator, reorganize their
respective departments.
   No person serving on a board or commission created by state law to discharge
a state function specifically within the City and County may be employed as a
paid staff member to a board or commission created by this Charter.
SEC. 4.127. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department shall preserve the public peace, prevent and detect
crime, and protect the rights of persons and property by enforcing the laws of
the United States, the State of California, and the City and County.
   The Chief of Police may appoint and remove at pleasure special police
officers.
   The Chief of Police shall have all powers which are now or that may be
conferred upon a sheriff by state law with respect to the suppression of any
riot, public tumult, disturbance of the public peace or organized resistance
against the laws or public authority.
   DISTRICT POLICE STATIONS. The Police Department shall maintain and operate
district police stations. The Police Commission, subject to the approval by the
Board of Supervisors, may establish additional district stations, abandon or
relocate any district station, or consolidate any two or more district
stations.
   BUDGET. Monetary awards and settlements disbursed by the City and County as
a result of police action or inaction shall be taken exclusively from a
specific appropriation listed as a separate line item in the Police Department
budget for that purpose.
   POLICE STAFFING. By no earlier than October 1 and no later than November 1
in every odd-numbered calendar year, the Chief of Police shall transmit to the
Police Commission a report describing the department’s current number of full-
duty sworn officers and recommending staffing levels of full-duty sworn
officers in the subsequent two fiscal years. The report shall include an
assessment of the Police Department’s overall staffing, the workload handled by
the department’s employees, the department’s public service objectives, the
department’s legal duties, and other information the Chief of Police deems
relevant to determining proper staffing levels of full-duty sworn officers. The
report shall evaluate and make recommendations regarding staffing levels at all
district stations and in all types of jobs and services performed by full-duty
sworn officers. By no later than July 1 in every odd-numbered calendar year,
the Police Commission shall adopt a policy prescribing the methodologies that
the Chief of Police may use in evaluating staffing levels, which may include
consideration of factors such as workload metrics, the Department’s targets for
levels of service, ratios between supervisory and non-supervisory positions in
the Department, whether particular services require a fixed number of hours,
and other factors the Commission determines are best practices or otherwise
relevant. The Chief of Police may, but is not required by this Section
4.127 to, submit staffing reports regarding full-duty sworn officers to the
Police Commission in even-numbered years.
   The Police Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the Chief of
Police’s staffing report by December 31 in every odd-numbered calendar year.
The Police Commission shall consider the most recent report in its
consideration and approval of the Police Department’s proposed budget every
fiscal year, but the Commission shall not be required to accept or adopt any of
the recommendations in the report.
   The Board of Supervisors is empowered to adopt ordinances necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this section regarding staffing levels including but
not limited to ordinances regulating the scheduling of police training classes.
   Further, the Police Commission shall initiate an annual review to
civilianize as many positions as possible and submit that report to the Board
of Supervisors annually for review and approval.
   PATROL SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS. The Commission may appoint patrol special
police officers and for cause may suspend or dismiss patrol special police
officers after a hearing on charges duly filed with the Commission and after a
fair and impartial trial. Patrol special police officers shall be regulated by
the Police Commission, which may establish requirements for and procedures to
govern the position, including the power of the Chief of Police to suspend a
patrol special police officer pending a hearing on charges. Each patrol special
police officer shall be at the time of appointment not less than 21 years of
age and must possess such physical qualifications as may be required by the
Commission.
   Patrol special police officers may be designated by the Commission as the
owners of a certain beat or territory which may be established or rescinded by
the Commission. Patrol special police officers designated as the owners of a
certain beat or territory or the legal heirs or representatives of the owners
may dispose of their interest in the beat or territory to a person of good
moral character, approved by the Police Commission and eligible for appointment
as a patrol special police officer.
   Commission designation of beats or territories shall not affect the ability
of private security companies to provide on-site security services on the
inside or at the entrance of any property located in the City and County.
(Amended November 2003; March 2004; Proposition G, Approved 11/8/2016;
Proposition_E, Approved 11/3/2020)
SEC. 4.128. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The Fire Department shall perform duties and enforce all applicable laws
pertaining to the protection from, and the prevention, suppression, control and
investigation of fires.
   The Fire Chief shall cause the Fire Department to inspect all occupied or
vacated structures to determine compliance with applicable laws relative to
fire prevention, protection and control and also the protection of persons and
property from fire.
   The Fire Chief may during a conflagration cause to be removed any structure
for the purpose of checking the progress of the conflagration.
SEC. 4.129. DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES.
   The director of the Department of Administrative Services shall purchase all
supplies, equipment and contractual services required by the several
departments and offices of the City and County, except as otherwise provided in
the Administrative Code. Except in cases of emergency, the director shall not
enter into any contract or issue any purchase order unless the Controller shall
certify thereon that sufficient unencumbered balances are available in the
proper fund to meet the payments under such purchase order or contract as these
become due. The director shall have charge of the central warehouses, central
storerooms, central garage and shop.
   The director shall by rules and regulations approved by the Controller,
designate and authorize appropriate personnel within the Department of
Administrative Services to exercise the director's signature powers for
purchase orders and contract.
   The director shall have authority to exchange used materials, supplies and
equipment to the advantage of the City and County, advertise for bids, and to
sell and otherwise dispose of personal property belonging to the City and
County. The director shall have authority to require the transfer of surplus
property in any department to stores or to other departments.
   The director shall manage all public buildings, facilities and real estate
of the City and County, unless otherwise provided for in this Charter.
   Additional duties and functions of the Department of Administrative Services
shall be assigned the City Administrator, by ordinance or pursuant to Section
4.132.
SEC. 4.131. COUNTY CLERK.
   The County Clerk shall perform all duties of the County Clerk-Recorder until
such office is merged into the Office of the Assessor-Recorder pursuant to
Section
6.101.
SEC. 4.132. EXECUTIVE BRANCH REORGANIZATION.
   The Mayor, by issuing a notice to the Board of Supervisors, may reorganize
duties and functions between departments and other units of government within
the executive branch. Such reorganization shall become effective 30 days after
its issuance unless disapproved by the Board of Supervisors during that time.
   A proposed reorganization shall provide for the transfer of:
   1.   Civil service employees who are engaged in the performance of a
function or duty transferred to another office, agency or department; such
transfer shall not adversely affect status, position, compensation or pension
or retirement rights and privileges;
   2.   Any unexpended balances of appropriations and other funds available for
use in connection with any office, agency, department or function affected by
the reorganization; any unexpended balance so transferred shall be used only
for the purpose for which the appropriation was originally made, except as this
Charter otherwise permits.
SEC. 4.133. HOMELESSNESS OVERSIGHT COMMISSION.
   (a)   There shall be a Homelessness Oversight Commission (“Commission”) to
oversee the Department of Homelessness and Supportive Housing (“Department”),
or any successor agency. The Department shall, to the extent prescribed by
ordinance, manage and direct housing, programs, and services for persons
experiencing homelessness in the City, including, but not limited to, street
outreach, homeless shelters, transitional housing, homelessness prevention, and
permanent supportive housing.
   (b)   The Commission shall consist of seven members, appointed as follows:
      (1)   Seats 1, 2, 3, and 4 shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
confirmation by the Board of Supervisors. Each nomination of the Mayor shall be
subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors, and shall be the subject of a
public hearing and vote within 60 days of the date the Clerk of the Board
receives notice of the nomination from the Mayor. If the Board fails to act on
the nomination within those 60 days, the nominee shall be deemed approved. The
appointment shall become effective on the date the Board adopts a motion
approving the nomination or on the 61st day after the Clerk of the Board
receives notice of the nomination, whichever is earlier. Seat 1 shall be held
by a person who has personally experienced homelessness. Seat 2 shall be held
by a person with significant experience providing services to or engaging in
advocacy on behalf of persons experiencing homelessness. Seat 3 shall be held
by a person with expertise in mental health service delivery or substance use
treatment. Seat 4 shall be held by a person with a record of participation in a
merchants’ or small business association, or neighborhood association. In
addition to the aforementioned qualifications, at least one of the Mayor’s
appointees shall have experience in budgeting, finance, and auditing.
      (2)   Seats 5, 6, and 7 shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
Seat 5 shall be held by a person who has personally experienced homelessness.
Seat 6 shall be held by a person with significant experience providing services
to or engaging in advocacy on behalf of persons experiencing homelessness. Seat
7 shall be held by a person with significant experience working with homeless
families with children and/or homeless youth.
      (3)   Section
4.101 shall apply to these appointments, with a particular emphasis on
diversity in ethnicity, race, age, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation,
and types of disabilities.
   (c)   Commission members shall serve at the pleasure of their respective
appointing authorities and may be removed by their appointing authorities at
any time. Vacancies shall be filled by the respective appointing authorities as
prescribed in subsections (b)(1) and (2).
   (d)   Commissioners shall serve four-year terms, beginning at noon on May 1,
2023; provided, however, the term of the initial appointees in Seats 1, 4, and
6 shall be a two-year term, expiring at noon on May 1, 2025.
   (e)   The Commission shall elect a Chair, Vice-Chair, and officers for other
such positions, if any, that it chooses to create.
   (f)   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   With respect to the Department, the Commission shall exercise all
of the powers and duties of boards and commissions as set forth in Sections
4.102,
4.103, and
4.104, including but not limited to, approving applicable departmental budgets,
formulating annual and long-term goals consistent with the overall objectives
of the City and County, establishing departmental performance standards,
holding hearings and taking testimony, conducting public education and outreach
concerning programs and services for homeless persons in San Francisco, and
issues concerning homelessness, and conducting performance audits of the
Department to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of the Department’s
delivery of services to persons experiencing homelessness and persons
participating in programs overseen by the Department, and the extent to which
the Department has met the annual goals and performance standards established
by the Commission.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the Commission’s authority to review and set
policies, the Commission shall not have the authority to approve, disapprove,
or modify criteria used to ascertain eligibility or priority for programs and/
or services operated or provided by the Department, where such criteria are
required as a condition of the receipt of state or federal funding.
   (g)   The Mayor and the Board of Supervisors shall make their initial
appointments to Seats 1-7, respectively, on the Commission by no later than
noon, March 1, 2023. The Commission shall come into existence upon the
appointment, and confirmation where required, of four members, or at noon on
May 1, 2023, whichever is later. The Commission shall have its inaugural
meeting within 30 days of its coming into existence.
   (h)   By no later than May 1, 2023, the City shall enact an ordinance that:
      (1)   Amends Article XXXI of Chapter 5 of the Administrative Code, to
provide that the Commission shall appoint all members of the Local Homeless
Coordinating Board (“LHCB”) and that the LHCB’s sole duties shall be to serve
as the Continuum of Care governing body and to advise the Commission on issues
relating to the City’s participation in the Continuum of Care program. This
subsection (h)(1) shall not preclude the City by ordinance from amending said
Article XXXI in a manner that is not inconsistent with this subsection or as
necessary to comply with federal requirements relating to the Continuum of
Care.
      (2)   Amends Article XII of Chapter 20 of the Administrative Code, to
provide that the Shelter Monitoring Committee shall advise the Commission in
lieu of advising the LHCB. This subsection (h)(2) shall not preclude the City
by ordinance from amending said Article XII in a manner that is not
inconsistent with this subsection.
      (3)   Amends Article XLI of Chapter 5 of the Administrative Code and
Section 2810 of Article 28 of the Business and Tax Regulations Code, to provide
that the Our City, Our Home Oversight Committee (“Oversight Committee”) shall
advise and make recommendations to the Commission and the Health Commission, in
addition to advising and making recommendations to the Mayor and the Board of
Supervisors, on administration of the Our City, Our Home Fund (“Fund”) and on
monies appropriated from the Fund, which monies are subject to the City budget
approval process set forth in Article IX of the Charter, and to provide that
the needs assessment conducted by the Oversight Committee shall inform the
Department’s strategic planning process. This subsection (h)(3) shall not
preclude the City by ordinance from amending said Article XLI  and said Section
2810 in a manner that is not inconsistent with this subsection, Section 2811 of
the Business and Tax Regulations Code, and Articles XIIIA and XIIIC of the
California Constitution, as may be amended from time to time.
   (i)   The references in subsection (h) to the LHCB, Shelter Monitoring
Committee, and Oversight Committee do not change their character as bodies
created by ordinance. Accordingly, they are not subject to provisions in the
Charter or Municipal Code that apply exclusively to bodies enumerated in the
Charter or created by the Charter, including but not limited to Charter
Sections
4.101.1 and
4.101.5.
   (j)   Within one year of the effective date of the ordinance adopted by the
Board of Supervisors in compliance with subsection (h), the City Attorney shall
cause subsections (h)-(j) of this Section
4.133 to be removed from the Charter.
(Added by Proposition_C, Approved 11/8/2022)
(Added November 1998; repealed November 2014)
SEC. 4.134. SMALL BUSINESS COMMISSION.
   (a)   There shall be a Small Business Commission to oversee the San
Francisco Office of Small Business. The Commission shall consist of seven
members, who shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. The Mayor
shall appoint four members of the Commission; the Board of Supervisors shall
appoint the remaining three members. The Mayor shall designate two of his or
her initial appointments to serve for two-year terms; the Board of Supervisors
shall designate one of its initial appointments to serve a two-year term.
Thereafter, all commissioners shall serve for four-year terms.
   (b)   At least five of the individuals appointed to the Commission shall be
owners, operators, or officers of San Francisco small businesses. One of the
individuals appointed to the Commission may be either a current or former
owner, operator, or officer of a San Francisco small business. One member of
the Commission may be an officer or representative of a neighborhood economic
development organization or an expert in small business finance.
      Pursuant to Government Code Section 87103, individuals appointed to the
Commission under this Section are intended to represent and further the
interest of the particular industries, trades, or professions specified herein.
Accordingly, it is found that for purposes of persons who hold such office, the
specified industries, trades, or professions are tantamount to and constitute
the public generally within the meaning of Government Code Section 87103.
   (c)   The Mayor and the Board of Supervisors shall select Commission members
who reflect the diversity of neighborhood and small business interests in the
City.
(Added November 2003)
SEC. 4.135. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   GENERAL. There is hereby created a Historic Preservation Commission, which
shall advise the City on historic preservation matters, participate in
processes that involve historic or cultural resources, and take such other
actions concerning historic preservation as may be prescribed by ordinance. The
Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of seven members nominated by
the Mayor and subject to approval by a majority of the Board of Supervisors.
   The term and tenure of all members sitting on the Landmarks Preservation
Advisory Board, created under Article 10 of the Planning Code, as of the
effective date of this section shall terminate on December 31, 2008. Of the
original appointments to the Historic Preservation Commission, four shall be
for a four-year term and three for a two-year term as follows; the odd-numbered
seats shall be for four-year terms and the even-numbered seats shall be for
two-year terms. After the expiration of the original terms, all appointments
shall be for four-year terms, provided however, that a member may holdover
until a successor has been nominated by the Mayor and approved by the Board of
Supervisors. There shall be no limit on the number of terms a member may serve.
   The original nominations shall be made no later than 31 days after the date
of the election creating this section. If the Mayor fails to nominate an
original appointment within said period, the nomination for the original
appointment may be made by the President of the Board of Supervisors, subject
to the approval of a majority of the Board of Supervisors.
   Within 60 days of the expiration of a term or other vacancy the Mayor shall
nominate a qualified person to fill the vacant seat for the term, or the
remainder of the term, subject to approval by a majority of the Board of
Supervisors who shall hold a public hearing and vote on the nomination within
60 days of the Mayor's transmittal of the nomination to the Clerk of the Board
of Supervisors. If the Mayor fails to make such nomination within 60 days, the
nomination may be made by the President of the Board of Supervisors, subject to
the approval of a majority of the Board of Supervisors. The appointment shall
become effective on the date the Board of Supervisors adopts a motion approving
the nomination or after 60 days from the date the Mayor transmits the
nomination to the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors if the Board of Supervisors
fails to act.
   Members may be removed by the appointing officer only pursuant to Section
15.105.
   QUALIFICATIONS. In addition to the specific requirements set forth below,
members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be persons specially
qualified by reason of interest, competence, knowledge, training and experience
in the historic, architectural, aesthetic, and cultural traditions of the City,
interested in the preservation of its historic structures, sites and areas, and
residents of the City. Six of the members of the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be specifically qualified in the following fields:
   1.   Seats 1 and 2: licensed architects meeting the Secretary of the
Interior's Professional Qualifications Standards for historic architecture;
   2.   Seat 3: an architectural historian meeting the Secretary of the
Interior's Professional Qualifications Standards for architectural history with
specialized training and/or demonstrable experience in North American or Bay
Area architectural history;
   3.   Seat 4: an historian meeting the Secretary of the Interior's
Professional Qualifications Standards for history with specialized training
and/or demonstrable experience in North American or Bay Area history;
   4.   Seat 5: an historic preservation professional or professional in a
field such as law, land use, community planning or urban design with
specialized training and/or demonstrable experience in historic preservation or
historic preservation planning.
   5.   Seat 6 shall be specially qualified in one of the following fields or
in one of the fields set forth for Seats 1, 2, or 3;
      a.   A professional archeologist meeting the Secretary of the Interior's
Professional Qualification Standards for Archeology;
      b.   A real estate professional or contractor who has demonstrated a
special interest, competence, experience, and knowledge in historic
preservation;
      c.   A licensed structural engineer with at least four years of
experience in seismic and structural engineering principals applied to historic
structures; or
      d.   A person with training and professional experience with materials
conservation.
      Seat 7 shall be an at large seat subject to the minimum qualifications
set forth above.
   LANDMARK AND HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall have the authority to recommend approval, disapproval, or
modification of landmark designations and historic district designations under
the Planning Code to the Board of Supervisors. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall send recommendations regarding landmarks designations to the
Board of Supervisors without referral or recommendation of the Planning
Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission shall refer recommendations
regarding historic district designations to the Planning Commission, which
shall have 45 days to review and comment on the proposed designation, which
comments, if any, shall be forwarded to the Board of Supervisors together with
the Historic Preservation Commission's recommendation. Decisions of the
Historic Preservation Commission to disapprove designation of a landmark or
historic district shall be final unless appealed to the Board of Supervisors.
   CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
approve, disapprove, or modify certificates of appropriateness for work to
designated landmarks or within historic districts. For minor alterations, the
Historic Preservation Commission may delegate this function to staff, whose
decision may be appealed to the Historic Preservation Commission.
For projects that require multiple planning approvals, the Historic
Preservation Commission must review and act on any Certificate of
Appropriateness before any other planning approval action. For projects that
(1) require a conditional use permit or permit review under Section 309, et
seq., of the Planning Code and (2) do not concern an individually landmarked
property, the Planning Commission may modify any decision on a Certificate of
Appropriateness by a 2/3 vote, provided that the Planning Commission shall
apply all applicable historic resources provisions of the Planning Code.
   For projects that are located on vacant lots, the Planning Commission may
modify any decision on a Certificate of Appropriateness by a two-thirds vote,
provided that the Planning Commission shall apply all applicable historic
resources provisions of the Planning Code.
   The Historic Preservation Commission or Planning Commission's decision on a
Certificate of Appropriateness shall be final unless appealed to the Board of
Appeals, which may modify the decision by a 4/5 vote; provided, however, that
if the project requires Board of Supervisors approval or is appealed to the
Board of Supervisors as a conditional use, the decision shall not be appealable
to the Board of Appeals, but rather to the Board of Supervisors, which may
modify the decision by a majority vote.
   SIGNIFICANT OR CONTRIBUTORY BUILDING AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS
IN THE C-3 DISTRICTS. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the
authority to recommend approval, disapproval, or modification of Significant or
Contributory building and Conservation District designations under the Planning
Code to the Board of Supervisors. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
send recommendations regarding Significant or Contributory Buildings to the
Board of Supervisors without referral or recommendation of the Planning
Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission shall refer recommendations
regarding Conservation District designations to the Planning Commission, which
shall have 45 days to review and comment on the proposed designation, which
comments, if any, shall be forwarded to the Board of Supervisors together with
the Historic Preservation Commission's recommendation, Decisions of the
Historic Preservation Commission to disapprove designation of a Significant or
Contributory building or Conservation District shall be final unless appealed
to the Board of Supervisors.
   ALTERATION OF SIGNIFICANT OR CONTRIBUTORY BUILDINGS OR BUILDINGS IN
CONSERVATION DISTRICTS IN THE C-3 DISTRICTS. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall have the authority to determine if a proposed alteration is a
Major Alteration or a Minor Alteration. The Historic Preservation Commission
shall have the authority to approve, disapprove, or modify applications for
permits to alter or demolish designated Significant or Contributory buildings
or buildings within Conservation Districts. For Minor Alterations, the Historic
Preservation Commission may delegate this function to staff, whose decision may
be appealed to the Historic Preservation Commission.
   For projects that require multiple planning approvals, the Historic
Preservation Commission must review and act on any permit to alter before any
other planning approval action. For projects that (1) require a conditional use
permit or permit review under Section 309, et seq., of the Planning Code and
(2) do not concern a designated Significant (Categories I and II) or
Contributory (Category III only) building, the Planning Commission may modify
any decision on a permit to alter by a 2/3 vote, provided that the Planning
Commission shall apply all applicable historic resources provisions of the
Planning Code.
   For projects that are located on vacant lots, the Planning Commission may
modify any decision on a permit to alter by a two-thirds vote, provided that
the Planning Commission shall apply all applicable historic resources
provisions of the Planning Code.
   The Historic Preservation Commission's or Planning Commission's decision on
a permit to alter shall be final unless appealed to the Board of Appeals, which
may modify the decision by a 4/5 vote; provided, however, that if the project
requires Board of Supervisors approval or is appealed to the Board of
Supervisors as a conditional use, the decision shall not be appealable to the
Board of Appeals, but rather to the Board of Supervisors, which may modify the
decision by a majority vote.
   MILLS ACT CONTRACTS. The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the
authority to recommend approval, disapproval, or modification of historical
property contracts to the Board of Supervisors, without referral or
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   PRESERVATION ELEMENT OF THE GENERAL PLAN. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall recommend to the Planning Commission a Preservation Element of
the General Plan and shall periodically recommend to the Planning Commission
proposed amendments to such Preservation Element of the General Plan. Other
objectives, policies, and provisions of the General Plan and special area,
neighborhood, and other plans designed to carry out the General Plan, and
proposed amendments thereto, that are not contained within such Preservation
Element but that concern historic preservation shall be referred to the
Historic Preservation Commission for its comment and recommendations prior to
action by the Planning Commission. When the Planning Commission recommends to
the Board of Supervisors for approval or rejection proposed amendments to the
General Plan that concern historic preservation, any recommendation or comments
of the Historic Preservation Commission on such proposed amendments shall be
forwarded to the Board of Supervisors for its information.
   REFERRAL OF CERTAIN MATTERS. The following matters shall, prior to passage
by the Board of Supervisors, be submitted for written report by the Historic
Preservation Commission regarding effects upon historic or cultural resources:
ordinances and resolutions concerning historic preservation issues and historic
resources; redevelopment project plans; waterfront land use and project plans;
and such other matters as may be prescribed by ordinance. If the Planning
Commission is required to take action on the matter, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall submit any report to the Planning Commission as well as to the
Board of Supervisors; otherwise, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
submit any report to the Board of Supervisors.
   OTHER DUTIES. For proposed projects that may have an impact on historic or
cultural resources, the Historic Preservation Commission shall have the
authority to review and comment upon environmental documents under the
California Environmental Quality Act and the National Environmental Policy Act.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall act as the City's local historic
preservation review commission for the purposes of the Certified Local
Government Program, may recommend properties for inclusion in the National
Register of Historic Places, and may review and comment on federal undertakings
where authorized under the National Historic Preservation Act. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall review and comment upon any agreements proposed
under the National Historic Preservation Act where the City is a signatory
prior to any approval action on such agreement. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall have the authority to oversee and direct the survey and
inventory of historic properties.
   Once a quorum of members of the Historic Preservation Commission has been
originally appointed and approved, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
assume any powers and duties assigned to the Landmarks Preservation Advisory
Board until the Municipal Code has been amended to reflect the creation of the
Historic Preservation Commission.
   BUDGET, FEES, DEPARTMENT HEAD, AND STAFF. The provisions of Charter
subsections
4.102(3),
4.102(4),
4.102(5), and
4.102(6) shall not apply to the Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic
Preservation Commission may review and make recommendations on the Planning
Department budget and on any rates, fees, and similar charges with respect to
appropriate items coming within the Historic Preservation Commission's
jurisdiction to the department head of the Planning Department or the Planning
Commission. The department head of the Planning Department shall assume the
powers and duties that would otherwise be executed by an Historic Preservation
Commission department head. The Planning Department shall render staff
assistance to the Historic Preservation Commission.
(Added by Proposition J, 11/4/2008)
SEC. 4.136. DEPARTMENT OF POLICE ACCOUNTABILITY.
   (a)   There shall be under the Police Commission a Department of Police
Accountability (“DPA”).
   (b)   The Mayor shall appoint a nominee of the Police Commission as the
Director of DPA, subject to confirmation by the Board of Supervisors. The
Director shall serve at the pleasure of the Police Commission. If the Board of
Supervisors fails to act on the appointment within 30 days, the appointment
shall be deemed approved. In the event the office is vacant, until the Mayor
makes an appointment and that appointment is confirmed by the Board, the Police
Commission shall appoint an interim Director who shall serve at the pleasure of
the Police Commission. The appointment of the Director shall be exempt from the
civil service requirements of this Charter. The Director shall never have been
a uniformed member or employee of the Police Department. The Director shall be
the appointing officer under the civil service provisions of this Charter for
the appointment, removal, or discipline of employees of DPA.
   (c)   The Police Commission shall have the power and duty to organize,
reorganize, and manage DPA. Subject to the civil service provisions of this
Charter, DPA shall include investigators and hearing officers. The staff of DPA
shall consist of no fewer than one line investigator for every 150 sworn
members. Whenever the ratio of investigators to police officers specified by
this section is not met for more than 30 consecutive days, the Director shall
have the power to hire, and the City Controller must pay, temporary
investigators to meet such staffing requirements. No full-time or part-time
employee of DPA shall have previously served as a uniformed member of the
Police Department. Subject to rules of the Police Commission, the Director may
appoint part-time hearing officers who shall be exempt from the civil service
requirements of this Charter. Compensation of the hearing officers shall be at
rates recommended by the Commission and established by the Board of Supervisors
or by contract approved by the Board of Supervisors.
   (d)   DPA shall promptly, fairly, and impartially investigate all complaints
regarding police use of force, misconduct or allegations that a member of the
Police Department has not properly performed a duty, except those complaints
which on their face clearly indicate that the acts complained of were proper
and those complaints lodged by other members of the Police Department. DPA
shall use its best efforts to conclude investigations of such complaints and,
if sustained, transmit the sustained complaint to the Police Department within
nine months of receipt thereof by DPA. If DPA is unable to conclude its
investigation within such nine-month period, the Director, within such nine-
month period, shall inform the Chief of Police of the reasons therefor and
transmit information and evidence from the investigation as shall facilitate
the Chief’s timely consideration of the matter.
   (e)   DPA shall recommend disciplinary action to the Chief of Police on
those complaints that are sustained. The Director, after meeting and conferring
with the Chief of Police or his or her designee, may verify and file charges
with the Police Commission against members of the Police Department arising out
of sustained complaints; provided, that the Director may not verify and file
such charges for a period of 60 days following the transmittal of the sustained
complaint to the Police Department unless the Director issues a written
determination that the limitations period within which the member or members
may be disciplined under Government Code Section 3304, as amended from time to
time or any successor provisions thereto, may expire within such 60-day period
and (1) the Chief of Police fails or refuses to file charges with the Police
Commission arising out of the sustained complaint, (2) the Chief of Police or
his or her designee fails or refuses to meet and confer with the Director on
the matter, or (3) other exigent circumstances necessitate that the Director
verify and file charges to preserve the ability of the Police Commission to
impose punishment pursuant to Section
A8.343.
   (f)   The Director shall schedule hearings before hearing officers when such
is requested by the complainant or a member of the Police Department and, in
accordance with rules of the Commission, such a hearing will facilitate the
fact-finding process. The Board of Supervisors may provide by ordinance that
DPA shall in the same manner investigate and make recommendations to the Chief
of Police regarding complaints of misconduct by patrol special police officers
and their uniformed employees.
   (g)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the Chief of Police or a commanding
officer from investigating the conduct of a member of the Police Department
under his or her command, or taking disciplinary or corrective action,
otherwise permitted by this Charter, when such is warranted; and nothing herein
shall limit or otherwise restrict the disciplinary powers vested in the Chief
of Police and the Police Commission by other provisions of this Charter.
   (h)   DPA shall prepare in accordance with rules of the Commission monthly
summaries of the complaints received and shall prepare recommendations
quarterly concerning policies or practices of the Police Department which could
be changed or amended to avoid unnecessary tension with the public or a
definable segment of the public while insuring effective police services.
   (i)   DPA shall prepare a report for the President of the Board of
Supervisors each quarter. This report shall include, but not be limited to, the
number and type of complaints filed, the outcome of the complaints, and a
review of the disciplinary action taken. The President of the Board of
Supervisors shall refer this report to the appropriate committee of the Board
of Supervisors charged with public safety responsibilities. Said committee may
issue recommendations as needed.
   (j)   In carrying out its objectives, including the preparation of
recommendations concerning departmental policies or practices referenced above,
the investigations referenced above, and the audits noted below, DPA shall
receive prompt and full cooperation and assistance from all departments,
officers, and employees of the City and County, which shall, unless prohibited
by state or federal law, promptly produce all records and information requested
by DPA, including but not limited to (1) records relevant to Police Department
policies or practices, (2) personnel and disciplinary records of Police
Department employees, (3) criminal investigative and prosecution files, and (4)
all records to which the Police Commission has access, regardless of whether
those records pertain to a particular complaint. The DPA shall maintain the
confidentiality of any records and information it receives to the extent
required by state or federal law governing such records or information. The
Director may also request and the Chief of Police shall require the testimony
or attendance of any member of the Police Department to carry out the
responsibilities of DPA. Nothing in this Section
4.136 is intended or shall be construed to interfere with the duties of the
Sheriff or the District Attorney under state law, including their
constitutional and statutory powers and duties under Government Code Section
25303, as amended from time to time or any successor provisions thereto, or
other applicable state law or judicial decision.
   (k)   Every two years, DPA shall conduct a performance audit or review of
police officer use of force and how the Police Department has handled claims of
officer misconduct. DPA shall also have the authority to conduct performance
audits or reviews of whether Police Department personnel and management have
complied with federal and state law, City ordinances and policies, and Police
Department policies. The Director shall have the discretion to determine the
frequency, topics, and scope of such performance audits or reviews. To the
extent permitted by law, DPA shall also allow public access to information on
the progress and disposition of claims of misconduct or use of force, and the
results of the performance audits and reviews conducted by DPA.
   (l)   The DPA budget shall be separate from the budget of the Police
Department. Notwithstanding Section
4.102(3), the Director shall submit DPA’s proposed annual or two-year budget
directly to the Mayor.
(Added by Proposition G, Approved 11/8/2016)
SEC. 4.137. SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT OVERSIGHT.
   (a)   Establishment of Oversight Board.
      (1)   The Sheriff’s Department Oversight Board (“SDOB”) is hereby
established. The SDOB shall consist of seven members. The Board of Supervisors
shall appoint four members (to Seats 1, 2, 3, and 4), and the Mayor shall
appoint three members (to Seats 5, 6, and 7). Seat 4 shall be held by a person
with experience in labor representation.
      (2)   Members shall serve four-year terms, beginning at noon on March 1,
2021; provided, however, the term of the initial appointees to Seats 1, 3, and
5 shall expire at noon on March 1, 2023, whereas the term of the initial
appointees to Seats 2, 4, 6, and 7 shall expire at noon on March 1, 2025.
      (3)   No person may serve more than three successive terms as a member.
No person having served three successive terms may serve as a member until at
least four years after the expiration of the third successive term. Service for
a part of a term that is more than half the period of the term shall count as a
full term; further, this subsection (a)(3) makes no distinction between the
two-year terms referenced in subsection (a)(2) and four-year terms.
      (4)   Members may be removed from office only for official misconduct
under
Article XV.
      (5)   All members shall complete a training and orientation on custodial
law enforcement, constitutional policing, and Sheriff’s Department (“SFSD”)
policies and procedures, within 90 days of assuming office for their first
term. The Sheriff or the Sheriff’s designee shall prescribe the content of and
shall administer the training and orientation regarding SFSD patrol and
custodial law enforcement, policies and procedures. SFSD shall develop the
training content based on guidelines recommended by the National Association of
Civilian Oversight for Law Enforcement (“NACOLE”) or successor association, the
Bar Association of San Francisco or successor association, and/or the American
Civil Liberties Union, and SFSD shall consult with the Department of Police
Accountability, Public Defender, and the District Attorney in developing the
training content.
   (b)   SDOB Powers and Duties. The SDOB shall:
      (1)   Appoint, and may remove, the Inspector General in the Sheriff’s
Department Office of Inspector General (“OIG”), established in subsection (d).
      (2)   Evaluate the work of the OIG, and may review the Inspector
General’s individual work performance.
      (3)   Compile, evaluate, and recommend law enforcement custodial and
patrol best practices.
      (4)   Conduct community outreach and receive community input regarding
SFSD operations and jail conditions, by holding public meetings and soliciting
input from persons incarcerated in the City and County.
      (5)   Prepare and submit a quarterly report to the Sheriff and Board of
Supervisors regarding the SDOB evaluations and outreach, and OIG reports
submitted to SDOB.
      (6)   By March 1 of each year, prepare and present to the Board of
Supervisors or a committee designated by the President of the Board, an annual
report that includes a summary of SDOB evaluations and outreach, and OIG
reports submitted to SDOB, for the prior calendar year.
   (c)   In performing its duties, the SDOB may hold hearings, issue subpoenas
to witnesses to appear and for the production of evidence, administer oaths,
and take testimony.
   (d)   Establishment of Office of Inspector General. There is hereby
established the Sheriff’s Department Office of Inspector General (“OIG”), which
shall be a department under the SDOB, and separate from the Sheriff’s
Department. The OIG shall be headed by the Inspector General, appointed by the
SDOB as set forth in subsection (b)(1). The Inspector General shall be exempt
from civil service selection, appointment, and removal procedures.
   (e)   OIG Powers and Duties. The OIG shall:
      (1)   Receive, review, and investigate complaints against SFSD employees
and SFSD contractors; provided, however, that the OIG shall refer complaints
alleging criminal misconduct to the District Attorney, and refer complaints
alleging violations of ethics laws to the Ethics Commission.
      (2)   Investigate the death of any individual in the custody of the SFSD.
The OIG shall refer evidence of criminal misconduct regarding any death in
custody to the District Attorney. Notwithstanding such a referral, the OIG may
continue to investigate a death in custody unless OIG’s investigation will
interfere with a criminal investigation conducted by the District Attorney, or
any law enforcement agency to which the District Attorney may refer the
evidence of criminal misconduct.
      (3)   Recommend disciplinary action to the Sheriff where, following an
investigation pursuant to subsection (e)(1) or (e)(2), the OIG determines that
an employee’s actions or omissions violated law or SFSD policy; provide notice
of and a copy of the recommendation, the reasons for the recommendation, and
supporting records, to the extent permitted by State or federal law, to the
employee; and make available to the public any records and information
regarding OIG’s disciplinary recommendations to the extent permitted by State
or federal law.
      (4)   Develop and recommend to the Sheriff an SFSD use of force policy
and a comprehensive internal review process for all use of force and critical
incidents.
      (5)   Prepare and submit a quarterly report to the Sheriff and the SDOB
regarding OIG investigations that includes the number and type of complaints
under subsection (e)(1) filed; trend analysis; the outcome of the complaints;
any determination that the acts or omissions of an employee or contractor, in
connection with the subject matter of a complaint under subsection (e)(1), or a
death in custody under subsection (e)(2), violated law or SFSD policy; the
OIG’s recommendations, if any, for discipline; the outcome of any discipline
recommendations; and the OIG’s policy recommendations under subsection (e)(4).
      (6)   Monitor SFSD operations, including the provision of services to
incarcerated individuals, through audits and investigations, to ensure
compliance with applicable laws and policies.
   (f)   In performing its duties, the OIG may hold hearings, issue subpoenas
to witnesses to appear and for the production of evidence, administer oaths,
and take testimony. The OIG also may request and the Sheriff shall require the
testimony or attendance of any employee of the SFSD.
   (g)   Cooperation and Assistance from City Departments. In carrying out
their duties, the SDOB and OIG shall receive prompt and full cooperation and
assistance from all City departments, officers, and employees, including the
Sheriff and SFSD and its employees, which shall, unless prohibited by State or
federal law, promptly produce all records and information requested by the SDOB
or OIG, including but not limited to (1) personnel and disciplinary records of
SFSD employees, (2) SFSD criminal investigative files, (3) health information
pertaining to incarcerated individuals; and (4) all records and databases to
which the SFSD has access, regardless of whether those records pertain to a
particular complaint or incident. The Sheriff also shall, unless prohibited by
State or federal law, allow the OIG unrestricted and unescorted access to all
facilities, including the jails. The SDOB and OIG shall maintain the
confidentiality of any records and information it receives or accesses to the
extent required by local, State, or federal law governing such records or
information.
      In carrying out their duties, the SDOB and OIG shall cooperate and
collaborate with organizations that contract with SFSD to provide legal
services to incarcerated individuals.
   (h)   Budget and Staffing. Subject to the fiscal, budgetary, and civil
service provisions of the Charter, the OIG staff shall include no fewer than
one investigator for every 100 sworn SFSD employees. No SDOB or OIG staff,
including the Inspector General, shall have been employed previously by a law
enforcement agency or a labor organization representing law enforcement
employees.
   (i)   Nothing in this Section
4.137 shall prohibit, limit, or otherwise restrict the Sheriff or the Sheriff’s
designee from investigating the conduct of an employee or contractor of the
SFSD, or taking disciplinary or corrective action permitted by City or State
law.
   (j)   Nothing in this Section
4.137, including but not limited to subsections (f) and (g), is intended to or
shall be interpreted to abrogate, interfere with, or obstruct the independent
and constitutionally and statutorily designated duties of the Sheriff,
including the Sheriff’s duty to investigate citizens’ complaints against SFSD
personnel and the duty to operate and manage the jails, the California Attorney
General’s constitutional and statutory responsibility to oversee the Sheriff,
or other applicable State law. In carrying out their duties, the SDOB and OIG
shall cooperate and coordinate with the Sheriff so that the Sheriff, the SDOB,
and the OIG may properly discharge their respective responsibilities.
(Added by Proposition_D, Approved 11/3/2020)
SEC. 4.139. SANITATION AND STREETS COMMISSION.
   (a)   Purpose. There is hereby established a Sanitation and Streets
Commission.
   (b)   Membership and Terms of Office.
      (1)   The Commission shall consist of five members, appointed as follows:
Seats 1 and 2 shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. Seat 3 shall be
appointed by the Controller subject to confirmation by the Board of
Supervisors. Seats 4 and 5 shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
confirmation by the Board of Supervisors.
   Each nomination of the Mayor and the Controller shall be subject to approval
by the Board of Supervisors, and shall be the subject of a public hearing and
vote within 60 days of the date the Clerk of the Board receives notice of the
nomination from the Mayor or Controller. If the Board fails to act on the
nomination within those 60 days, the nominee shall be deemed approved. The
appointment shall become effective on the date the Board adopts a motion
approving the nomination or on the 61st day after the Clerk of the Board
receives notice of the nomination, whichever is earlier.
   Qualifications for commissioners that are desirable, but not required,
include a background or experience in cleaning and maintaining public spaces,
urban forestry, urban design, construction, skilled crafts and trades, finance
and audits, architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, or performance
measurement and management.
      (2)   Members of the Commission shall serve four-year terms; provided,
however, the term of the initial appointees in Seats 1 and 4 shall be two
years.
      (3)   Members may be removed at will by their respective appointing
officer.
   (c)   Duties. The Commission shall hold public hearings and set policies for
the Department of Public Works (the “Department”) regarding sanitation
standards and protocols, and maintenance of the public right of way. In
addition, the Commission shall:
      (1)   review and evaluate data regarding the condition of the public
right of way, including but not limited to data collected by the Department and
annual reports generated by the Controller; and
      (2)   establish minimum standards of cleanliness for the public right of
way, and set baselines for services to be administered by the Department to
maintain cleanliness of the public right of way.
      Notwithstanding Sections
4.102,
4.103, and
4.104 of this Charter, the Commission shall exercise only the powers set forth
in this subsection (c), and the Public Works Commission shall exercise the
oversight authority described in those sections over the Department of Public
Works, as set forth in Section
4.141.
   (d)   Transition following November 8, 2022 election. The tenures and terms
of members of the Commission on November 8, 2022 shall continue as provided in
this Section
4.139.
(Added by Proposition_B, Approved 11/3/2020; amended by Proposition_B, Approved
11/8/2022)
SEC. 4.140. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (a)   Responsibilities of Department. There shall be a Department of Public
Works (the “Department”). On January 1, 2023, the Department shall assume the
responsibilities of the Department of Sanitation and Streets as they existed on
December 31, 2022, and shall retain the existing responsibilities of the
Department of Public Works. The Department shall be headed by a Director of
Public Works appointed by the Mayor as provided in Sections
3.100(19) and
4.102(5).
   Except as otherwise provided in the Charter or pursuant to Section
4.132, in addition to any other duties assigned by ordinance, the Department
shall have the following duties: the design, building, repair, and improvement
of the City’s infrastructure, including City-owned buildings and facilities and
the public right of way; maintenance of the public right of way, including
street sweeping, and litter abatement; the provision and maintenance of City
trash receptacles and removal of illegal dumping and graffiti in the public
right of way; and planting and maintenance of street trees pursuant to Section
16.129.
   (b)   Nothing in this Section
4.140 shall relieve property owners of their legal responsibilities set by City
or State law, including as those laws may be amended in the future.
   (c)   Transition.
      (1)   Notwithstanding subsection (a), the Director of Public Works or
person serving in an acting capacity as Director of Public Works on December
31, 2022, shall continue to serve in that capacity beginning on January 1,
2023. If at that time there is a person in an acting capacity serving as the
Director of Public Works, or if at any time the position of Director of Public
Works is vacant for any reason, the position shall be filled in accordance with
the Charter provisions governing appointment of a department head. This
subsection (c)(1) does not modify the powers vested in the Public Works
Commission to remove the Director of Public Works in accordance with Section
4.102(6).
      (2)   By no later than June 30, 2023, the Director of Public Works shall
submit to the Board of Supervisors a proposed ordinance amending the Municipal
Code to conform to Sections
4.139,
4.140, and
4.141 and the repeal of Section
4.138.
(Formerly Sec.
4.130; Renumbered and amended by Proposition_B, Approved 11/3/2020; amended by
Proposition_B, Approved 11/8/2022)
SEC. 4.141. PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSION.
   (a)   Purpose. There is hereby established a Public Works Commission.
   (b)   Membership and Terms of Office.
      (1)   The Commission shall consist of five members, appointed as follows:
         Seats 1 and 5 shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors. Seats 2
and 4 shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Board of
Supervisors. Seat 3 shall be appointed by the Controller subject to
confirmation by the Board of Supervisors.
         Each nomination of the Mayor and the Controller shall be subject to
approval by the Board of Supervisors, and shall be the subject of a public
hearing and vote within 60 days of the date the Clerk of the Board receives
notice of the nomination from the Mayor or Controller. If the Board fails to
act on the nomination within those 60 days, the nominee shall be deemed
approved. The appointment shall become effective on the date the Board adopts a
motion approving the nomination or on the 61st day after the Clerk of the Board
receives notice of the nomination, whichever is earlier.
         Qualifications for commissioners that are desirable, but not required,
include a background or experience in cleaning and maintaining public spaces,
urban forestry, urban design, construction, skilled crafts and trades, finance
and audits, architecture, landscape architecture, engineering, or performance
measurement and management.
      (2)   Members of the Commission shall serve four-year terms; provided,
however, the term of the initial appointees in Seats 1, 3, and 5 shall be two
years.
      (3)   Commissioners may be removed from office at will by their
respective appointing authority.
   (c)   Powers and Duties. With regard to the Department of Public Works, the
Commission shall exercise all the powers and duties of boards and commissions
set forth in Sections
4.102,
4.103, and
4.104, except for the authority conferred on the Sanitation and Streets
Commission in Section
4.139, and may take other actions as prescribed by ordinance.
   (d)   Transition following November 8, 2022 election. The tenures and terms
of members of the Commission on November 8, 2022 shall continue as provided in
this Section
4.141.
(Added by Proposition_B, Approved 11/3/2020; amended by Proposition_B, Approved
11/8/2022)
ARTICLE V:
EXECUTIVE BRANCH – ARTS AND CULTURE
SEC. 5.100. GENERAL.
   The arts and culture departments of the City and County shall be the Arts
Commission, the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, the Fine Arts Museums of San
Francisco and the War Memorial and Performing Arts Center. These departments
shall be a part of the executive branch of City and County government.
   The terms of office of all trustees and commissioners shall continue as they
existed on the effective date of this Charter. All vacancies shall be filled
within 90 days.
   The governing boards of the arts and culture departments may accept and
shall comply with the terms and conditions of loans, gifts, devises, bequests
or agreements donating works of art or other assets to their department without
action of the Board of Supervisors so long as acceptance of the same entails no
expense for the City and County beyond ordinary care and maintenance.
SEC. 5.101. CHARITABLE TRUST DEPARTMENTS.
   For the purposes of this Article, the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, The
Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco and the War Memorial and Performing Arts
Center are referred to as the "charitable trust departments."
   Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit or change the powers and
responsibilities of the governing boards of the charitable trust departments
insofar as they involve administration of the charitable trusts, gifts and
contracts for which they are responsible.
   The charitable trust departments shall have exclusive charge of the trusts
and all other assets under their jurisdiction, which may be acquired by loan,
purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise, including any land or buildings
set aside for their use. They shall have authority to maintain, operate,
manage, repair or reconstruct existing buildings and construct new buildings,
and to make and enter into contracts relating thereto, subject, insofar as City
funds are to be used, to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of this Charter.
SEC. 5.102. CITY MUSEUMS.
   When the term "museums" is used in this Article, unless otherwise specified,
it refers to both the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco and The Fine Arts
Museums of San Francisco.
   Trustees and commissioners of the museums are exempt from the requirement of
Section
4.101(2) of this Charter, except that at least a majority of The Fine Arts
Museum Board of Trustees shall be residents of the City and County. Members
shall serve for three-year terms, and may be removed by the Mayor only pursuant
to Section
15.105. Members shall serve without compensation.
   The governing boards of the museums shall adopt by-laws providing for the
conduct of their affairs, including the appointment of an executive committee
which shall have authority to act in such matters as are specified by the
governing board.
   The governing boards of the museums shall appoint and may remove a director
and such other executive and administrative positions as may be necessary.
Appointees to such positions need not be residents of the City and County.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the governing boards may
accept and utilize contributions to supplement or pay for the salaries and
benefits of these appointees in order to establish competitive compensation,
provided that only compensation established pursuant to the salary provisions
of this Charter shall be considered for Retirement System purposes.
   The governing boards of the museums may insure any loaned exhibit and agree
to indemnification and binding arbitration provisions necessary to insuring
exhibitions without action of the Board of Supervisors so long as such
agreement entails no expense to the City and County beyond ordinary insurance
expense. The Recreation and Park Department shall maintain and care for the
grounds of the Museums.
SEC. 5.103. ARTS COMMISSION.
   The Arts Commission shall consist of fifteen members appointed by the Mayor,
pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. Eleven members shall be practicing arts
professionals including two architects, a landscape architect, and
representatives of the performing, visual, literary and media arts; and four
members shall be lay members. The President of the Planning Commission, or a
member of the Commission designated by the President, shall serve ex officio.
Members may be removed by the Mayor.
   The Commission shall appoint and may remove a director of the department.
The Commission shall encourage artistic awareness, participation and
expression; education in the arts; assist independent local groups with the
development of their own programs; promote the employment of artists and those
skilled in crafts, in the public and private sectors; provide liaison with
state and federal agencies to ensure increased funding for the arts from these
agencies as well as represent arts issues and policy in the respective
governmental bodies; promote the continued availability of living and working
space for artists within the City and County; and enlist the aid of all City
and County governmental units in the task of ensuring the fullest expression of
artistic potential by and among the residents of San Francisco.
   In furtherance of the foregoing the Arts Commission shall:
   1.   Approve the designs for all public structures, any private structure
which extends over or upon any public property and any yards, courts, set-backs
or usable open spaces which are an integral part of any such structures;
   2.   Approve the design and location of all works of art before they are
acquired, transferred or sold by the City and County, or are placed upon or
removed from City and County property, or are altered in any way; maintain and
keep an inventory of works of art owned by the City and County; and maintain
the works of art owned by the City and County;
   3.   Promote a neighborhood arts program to encourage and support an active
interest in the arts on a local and neighborhood level, assure that the City
and County-owned community cultural centers remain open, accessible and vital
contributors to the cultural life of the City and County, establish liaison
between community groups and develop support for neighborhood artists and arts
organizations; and
   4.   Supervise and control the expenditure of all appropriations made by the
Board of Supervisors for the advancement of the visual, performing or literary
arts.
   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or abridge the powers or
exclusive jurisdiction of the charitable trust departments or the California
Academy of Sciences or the Library Commission over their activities; the land
and buildings set aside for their use; or over the other assets entrusted to
their care.
SEC. 5.104. ASIAN ART MUSEUM OF SAN FRANCISCO.
   The Asian Art Commission shall consist of twenty-seven trustees appointed by
the Mayor. In filling vacancies, the Mayor shall solicit nominations from the
Commission and shall give due consideration to such nominees in filling such
vacancies to the end that the members of the Commission shall be representative
of the fields of Asian art and culture by reason of their knowledge,
experience, education, training, interest or activity therein.
   The Commission shall:
   1.   Develop and administer that museum which is known as the "Asian Art
Museum of San Francisco," or by such other title as may be chosen by not less
than two-thirds of the members of the Commission;
   2.   Control and manage the City and County's Asian art with the Avery
Brundage Collection as its nucleus, consistent with the conditions applicable
to the Brundage Collection and other gifts;
   3.   Maintain a charitable foundation or other legal entity for the purpose
of developing the Asian Art Museum;
   4.   Promote, establish and develop an acquisition fund for Asian art
objects; and
   5.   Collaborate with other groups and institutions to extend and deepen the
activities necessary to establish the Asian Art Museum as the outstanding
center of Asian art and culture in the western world.
SEC. 5.105. THE FINE ARTS MUSEUMS OF SAN FRANCISCO.
   The California Palace of Legion of Honor and the M.H. de Young Memorial
Museum shall compromise the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, or such other
title as may be chosen by not less than two-thirds of the trustees of the Fine
Arts Museums. The Fine Arts Museums Board of Trustees shall consist of 62
members to be elected by the members of the Board. On a vote of the majority of
members, the number of Trustees may be increased or decreased from time to time
as needed, provided that the number of Trustees shall not be more than 62, and
provided further that a vote to decrease the number shall not affect the power
or tenure of any incumbent. The Board may act by majority of the members
present at meetings in which a quorum is in attendance.
   In selecting members to serve on the Board, the Board of Trustees shall give
due consideration to nominees who are broadly representative of the diverse
communities of the City and County and knowledgeable in the fields of art and
culture, as demonstrated by their experience, training, interest or
philanthropic activity.
   A quorum of the Board shall consist of one-third of the number of trustees
in office at the time. A majority or two-thirds vote of the Board shall mean a
majority or two-thirds vote of the number of trustees present at the meeting at
which the vote is taken.
   The Board is responsible for the protection and conservation of the assets
of the Fine Arts Museums and for setting the public course the Museums will
follow. The Board shall assure that the Museums are open, accessible and vital
contributors to the cultural life of the City and County, and that the Museums'
programs bring art appreciation and education to all the people of the City and
County.
   The Board may enter into agreements with a not-for-profit or other legal
entity to develop or operate the museums and to raise and maintain funds for
the museums' support.
SEC. 5.106. WAR MEMORIAL AND PERFORMING ARTS CENTER.
   The governing board of the War Memorial and Performing Arts Center shall
consist of eleven trustees appointed by the Mayor, pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. In making appointments the Mayor shall give due
consideration to veterans and others who have a special interest in the
purposes for which the Center exists. Members may be removed by the Mayor only
pursuant to Section
15.105.
   The governing board shall appoint and may remove a director.
ARTICLE VI:
OTHER ELECTIVE OFFICERS
SEC. 6.100. DESIGNATION OF OTHER ELECTIVE OFFICERS.
   In addition to the officers required to be elected under other Articles of
this Charter, the following shall constitute the elective officers of the City
and County: the Assessor-Recorder, City Attorney, District Attorney, Public
Defender, Sheriff and Treasurer. Each such officer shall be elected for a four-
year term and shall serve full time.
   The City Attorney shall be licensed to practice law in all courts of the
State of California and shall have been so licensed for at least ten years next
preceding his or her election. The District Attorney and Public Defender shall
each be licensed to practice law in all courts of the State of California and
shall have been so licensed for at least five years next preceding his or her
election. Such officers shall not engage in the private practice of law during
the period they serve as elective officers of the City and County.
   Subject to the powers and duties set forth in this Charter, the officers
named in this section shall have such additional powers and duties prescribed
by state laws for their respective office. The terms of office in effect for
these officers on the date this Charter is adopted shall continue.
SEC. 6.101. ASSESSOR-RECORDER.
   The Assessor-Recorder shall:
   1.   Equitably and effectively administer the property assessment system of
the City and County; and
   2.   Exercise the duties of Assessor and Recorder provided under state law,
effective July 1, 1997.
SEC. 6.102. CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall:
   1.   Represent the City and County in legal proceedings with respect to
which it has an interest; provided that any elected officer, department head,
board or commission may engage counsel other than the City Attorney for legal
advice regarding a particular matter where the elected officers department
head, board or commission has reason to believe that the City Attorney may have
a prohibited financial conflict of interest under California law or a
prohibited ethical conflict of interest under the California Rules of
Professional Conduct with regard to the matter, subject to the following
limitations and conditions.
      The elected officer, department head, board or commission shall first
present a written request to the City Attorney for outside counsel. The written
request shall specify the particular matter for which the elected officer,
department head, board or commission seeks the services of outside counsel, a
description of the requested scope of services, and the potential conflict of
interest that is the basis for the request. Within five working days after
receiving the written request for outside counsel, the City Attorney shall
respond in writing to the elected officer, department head, board or commission
either consenting or not consenting to the provision of outside counsel. If the
City Attorney does not consent to the provision of outside counsel, the City
Attorney shall state in the written response why he or she believes that there
is no conflict of interest regarding the particular matter.
      If the elected officer, department head, board or commission continues to
believe there are adequate grounds for outside counsel despite the City
Attorney's response that there is no conflict of interest, the elected officer,
department head, board or commission may, within thirty days after receiving
the City Attorney's response, refer the issue of whether the City Attorney has
a prohibited conflict of interest regarding a particular matter to a retired
judge or justice of the state courts of California for resolution. If the
elected officer, department head, board or commission and City Attorney cannot
agree on a retired judge to hear the matter, the retired judge shall be
selected at random by an alternative dispute resolution provider. If the matter
is referred to a retired judge, the elected officer, department head, board or
commission, subject to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of the Charter,
shall be entitled to retain outside counsel to represent it solely on the issue
of whether the City Attorney has a conflict of interest regarding the
particular matter.
      In deciding whether the City Attorney has a conflict of interest
regarding a particular matter, the retired judge shall be bound by and apply
the applicable substantive law and Rules of Professional Conduct as if he or
she were a court of law. To the extent practicable, the retired judge shall
hear the matter within 15 days after its assignment to the retired judge, and
within 15 days after the hearing, shall issue a written opinion stating the
basis for the decision. The retired judge, but not the City Attorney or elected
officer, department head, board or commission, shall have the power to subpoena
witnesses and documents in this proceeding.
      The retired judge may request that the City Attorney secure written
advice from the California Fair Political Practices Commission, the State Bar
of California, or the California Attorney General on the question of whether
the City Attorney has a conflict of interest regarding the particular matter.
Upon such a request by the retired judge, the City Attorney shall secure such
written advice. The retired judge may consider, but is not bound by, written
advice so secured. The decision of the retired judge shall be final for the
limited purpose of determining whether or not the elected officer, department
head, board or commission may retain outside counsel for the particular matter.
      If the retired judge decides that the City Attorney does not have a
conflict of interest regarding the particular matter, the City Attorney shall
continue to be the legal adviser to the elected officer, department head, board
or commission for such matter. If the retired judge decides that the City
Attorney has a conflict of interest regarding a particular matter, the elected
officer, department head, board or commission shall be entitled to retain
outside counsel for legal advice regarding the particular matter, and the City
Attorney shall thereupon cease to advise the elected officer, department head
board or commission on such matter. Any such finding of a conflict of interest
shall not affect the City Attorney's role as legal advisor to the elected
officer, department head, board or commission on all other matters.
      If at any time after the retention of outside counsel, the City Attorney
believes that there is no longer a conflict of interest, the City Attorney
shall state in writing to the elected officer, department head, board or
commission why he or she believes that there is no longer a conflict of
interest. Within five working days after receiving the written statement from
the City Attorney, the elected officer, department head, board or commission
shall respond in writing, either agreeing or disagreeing that there is no
longer a conflict of interest. If the elected officer, department head, board
or commission agrees that there is no longer a conflict of interest regarding a
particular matter, the elected officer, department head, board or commission
shall cease employing outside counsel for legal advice regarding the matter,
and the City Attorney shall serve as legal adviser to the elected officer,
department head, board or commission regarding that matter. If the elected
officer, department head, board or commission states in its written response
that it believes the conflict of interest still exists, the City Attorney may,
within ten working days after receiving the response of the elected officer,
department head, board or commission, elect to refer the issue of whether the
conflict of interest regarding the particular matter continues to exist to the
same retired judge who originally heard the matter, if available. The same
procedures as established herein shall apply thereafter.
      In selecting outside counsel for any purpose described in this Section,
the elected officer, department head, board or commission shall give preference
to engaging the services of a City attorney's office, a County counsel's office
or other public entity law office with an expertise regarding the subject-
matter jurisdiction of the elected officer, department head, board or
commission. If the elected officer, department head, board or commission
concludes that private counsel is necessary, that attorney must be a member in
good standing with the Bar of California who has at least five year's
experience in the subject-matter jurisdiction of the elected officer,
department head, board or commission Any private counsel retained pursuant to
this Section shall be subject to the conflict of interest provisions of Section
13.103.5. The cost of any of the services of outside counsel and of the
alternative dispute resolution process authorized by this Section shall be paid
for by the elected officer, department head, board or commission, subject to
the budgetary and fiscal provisions of this Charter.
   2.   Represent an officer or official of the City and County when directed
to do so by the Board of Supervisors, unless the cause of action exists in
favor of the City and County against such officer or official;
   3.   Whenever a cause of action exists in favor of the City and County,
commence legal proceedings when such action is within the knowledge of the City
Attorney or when directed to do so by the Board of Supervisors, except for the
collection of taxes and delinquent revenues, which shall be performed by the
attorney for the Tax Collector;
   4.   Upon request, provide advice or written opinion to any officer,
department head or board, commission or other unit of government of the City
and County;
   5.   Make recommendations for or against the settlement or dismissal of
legal proceedings to the Board of Supervisors prior to any such settlement or
dismissal. Such proceedings shall be settled or dismissed by ordinance and only
upon the recommendation of the City Attorney;
   6.   Approve as to form all surety bonds, contracts and, prior to enactment,
all ordinances; and examine and approve title to all real property to be
acquired by the City and County;
   7.   Prepare, review annually and make available to the public a
codification of ordinances of the City and County then in effect;
   8.   Prepare and make available to the public an annual edition of this
Charter complete with all of its amendments and legal annotations; and
   9.   Establish in the Office of the City Attorney a Bureau of Claims
Investigation and Administration which shall have the power to investigate,
evaluate and settle for the several boards, commissions and departments all
claims for money or damages. The Bureau shall also have the power to
investigate incidents where the City faces potential civil liability, and to
settle demands before they are presented as claims, within dollar limits
provided for by ordinance, from a revolving fund to be established for that
purpose. The City Attorney shall appoint a chief of the Bureau who shall serve
at his or her pleasure. The chief of the Bureau may appoint, subject to
confirmation by the City Attorney, investigators who shall serve at the
pleasure of the chief.
   10.   During his or her tenure, not contribute to, solicit contributions to,
publicly endorse or urge the endorsement of or otherwise participate in a
campaign for a candidate for City elective office, other than himself or
herself or of a City ballot measure or be an officer, director or employee of
or hold a policy-making position in an organization that makes political
endorsements regarding candidates for City elective office or City ballot
measures.
(Amended November 2001; amended November 2002)
SEC. 6.103. DISTRICT ATTORNEY.
   The District Attorney shall:
   1.   Investigate all allegations of violations of laws which the District
Attorney has the power to prosecute in court or before any other trier of fact;
   2.   Prosecute all criminal cases in the appropriate courts and issue
warrants for the arrest of persons charged with crimes to be prosecuted in such
courts; and
   3.   Proceed in such civil cases as authorized by state law.
SEC. 6.104. PUBLIC DEFENDER.
   The Public Defender shall, upon the request of an accused who is financially
unable to employ counsel, or upon order of the Court, defend or give counsel or
advice to any person charged with the commission of a crime or in danger of
criminal prosecution.
SEC. 6.105. SHERIFF.
   The Sheriff shall:
   1.   Keep the County jail;
   2.   Receive all prisoners committed to jail by competent authorities;
   3.   Execute the orders and legal processes issued by courts of the State of
California;
   4.   Upon court order detail necessary bailiffs; and
   5.   Execute the orders and legal processes issued by the Board of
Supervisors or by any legally authorized department or commission.
   The Sheriff shall appoint, and at his or her pleasure may remove, an
attorney, one under-sheriff, one assistant sheriff and one confidential
secretary.
SEC. 6.106. TREASURER.
   The Treasurer shall be responsible for the collection of taxes, the receipt
of all monies collected by the City and County and their safeguard, deposit and
investment in accordance with sound financial practices, and shall be
responsible for collection of delinquent revenue. The Treasurer shall appoint a
Chief Assistant and a Tax Collector who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Treasurer.
ARTICLE VII:
JUDICIAL BRANCH
SEC. 7.100. SUPERIOR AND MUNICIPAL COURTS.
   The powers and duties of the Superior and Municipal Courts are as prescribed
by state law.
   Any fees required to be collected by the Superior Court, Municipal Court or
the Clerks of such Courts shall be deposited into the treasury of the City and
County and distributed therefrom as provided for by state law.
SEC. 7.101. ADULT PROBATION.
   Adult probation is a County function which is prescribed by state law. The
Superior Court shall appoint the Chief Adult Probation Officer. The Chief Adult
Probation Officer shall appoint such assistants, deputies and employees as may
be allowed or provided by the Board of Supervisors.
   The Chief Adult Probation Officer, and his or her assistants and deputies,
shall have the powers and duties conferred upon such adult probation officers,
assistants and deputies by state laws; and such additional duties as may be
prescribed by ordinances of the Board of Supervisors.
SEC. 7.102. JUVENILE PROBATION.
   The Juvenile Probation Commission shall consist of seven members who shall
be appointed by the Mayor, pursuant to Section
3.100, for staggered four-year terms. Two of the members shall be appointed
from lists of eligibles submitted to the Mayor by the Superior Court. The
Juvenile Probation Department shall be a part of the executive branch.
   Members may be removed by the Mayor only pursuant to Section
15.105.
   Any member may serve concurrently as a member of the Juvenile Justice
Commission created by state law and as a member of the Juvenile Probation
Commission herein created.
   The Chief Juvenile Probation Officer, assistants and deputies shall have the
powers and duties conferred upon such Chief Juvenile Probation Officers,
assistants and deputies by state law; and they shall perform all of the duties
prescribed by such laws, and such additional duties as may be prescribed by
ordinances of the Board of Supervisors.
ARTICLE VIII:
EDUCATION AND LIBRARIES
SEC. 8.100. UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT.
   The Unified School District shall be under the control and management of a
Board of Education composed of seven members who shall be elected pursuant to
Section
13.111. A student representative shall serve on the Board in accordance with
state law. No member of this Board shall be eligible to serve on the Governing
Board of the Community College District. The compensation for each member shall
be $500 per month.
(Amended November 2001; Proposition N, Approved 11/8/2016)
SEC. 8.101. GOVERNING BOARD OF THE COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT.
   The Community College District shall be under the control and management of
a Governing Board composed of seven members who shall be elected by the voters
of the Community College District. A student representative shall serve on the
Governing Board in accordance with state law. No member of this Board shall be
eligible to serve on the Board of Education. The compensation for each member
shall be $500 per month. The terms of office in effect for Board members on the
date this Charter is adopted shall continue.
(Amended November 2001)
SEC. 8.102. PUBLIC LIBRARIES.
   Libraries including the Library Commission and the Library Department shall
be a part of the executive branch.
   The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor,
pursuant to Section
3.100, for four-year terms. Members may be removed by the Mayor.
SEC. 8.103. LAW LIBRARY.
   The San Francisco Law Library shall be under the management and control of
the Board of Trustees, as established by act of the Legislature approved March
9, 1870. The Board shall consist of seven appointive members of the San
Francisco bar, and the Mayor, the Presiding Judge and the three judges of the
Appellate Department of the Superior Court, ex-officio. All vacancies on the
Board shall be filled by the Board.
   Pursuant to state law, the Board shall appoint and at its pleasure may
remove a librarian, who shall be its executive officer. The Board shall have
complete authority to manage its affairs consistent with this Charter and state
law.
   Compensation of Law Library personnel shall be fixed by the executive
officer of the Law Library, with approval of the Board of Trustees. Subject to
the budgetary and fiscal provisions of this Charter, the City and County shall
continue to fund the salaries for at least the positions of Librarian,
Assistant Librarian and Bookbinder.
   The City and County shall provide suitable and sufficient quarters for the
Law Library, fix up and furnish the same and provide for the supply of
necessary light, heat, stationery and other conveniences. The Library shall be
so located as to be readily accessible to the judges and officers of the
courts.
   The Clerks of the Superior and Municipal Courts shall collect fees provided
for law libraries by general law and the fees so collected shall be paid
monthly to the Treasurer of the Law Library, and shall constitute a law library
fund to be expended by the Trustees in the purchase of books and periodicals,
and in the establishment and maintenance of the Law Library.
   The judiciary, City, County and state officials, members of the Bar, and all
inhabitants of the City and County shall have free access, use and enjoyment of
the Law Library, subject to the rules and regulations of the Trustees.
ARTICLE VIIIA:
THE MUNICIPAL TRANSPORTATION AGENCY
SEC. 8A.100. PREAMBLE.
   (a)   An effective, efficient, and safe transportation system is vital for
San Francisco to achieve its goals for quality of life, environmental
sustainability, public health, social justice, and economic growth. The
Municipal Transportation Agency must manage San Francisco's transportation
system which includes automobile, freight, transit, bicycle, and pedestrian
networks to help the City meet those goals. Through this measure, the voters
seek to provide the Municipal Transportation Agency with improved resources and
expanded independence and authority in order to create a transportation system
that is among the best in the world.
   (b)   This article requires the Municipal Transportation Agency to develop
clear, meaningful and quantifiable measures of its performance and goals and to
regularly publicize those standards. This article also recognizes that the
workers of the Municipal Transportation Agency are vital to the success of the
Agency and to achieving the improvements voters seek. Therefore, it authorizes
incentives for excellence and requires accountability for both managers and
employees.
   (c)   Specifically, San Francisco residents require:
      1.   Reliable, safe, timely, frequent, and convenient transit service to
all neighborhoods;
      2.   A reduction in breakdowns, delays, over-crowding, preventable
accidents;
      3.   Clean and comfortable transit vehicles and stations, operated by
competent, courteous, and well trained employees;
      4.   Support and accommodation of the special transportation needs of the
elderly and the disabled;
      5.   Protection from crime and inappropriate passenger behavior on the
Municipal Railway;
      6.   Responsive, efficient, and accountable management;
      7.   Roads that are not gridlocked with congestion;
      8.   A safe and comprehensive network of bicycle lanes;
      9.   A safe and inviting environment for pedestrians;
      10.   Efficient movement of goods and deliveries;
      11.   A transportation sector that promotes environmental sustainability
and does not contribute to global warming; and
      12.   A well-managed and well-coordinated transportation system that
contributes to a livable urban environment.
      Through this measure, the voters seek to provide the transportation
system with the resources, independence and focus necessary to achieve these
goals.
   (d)   The voters find that one of the impediments to achieving these goals
in the past has been that responsibility for transportation has been diffused
throughout City government. Accordingly, this Article places within the
Municipal Transportation Agency the powers and duties relating to transit now
vested in other departments, boards, and commissions of the City and County.
This Article further requires that, to the extent other City and County
agencies provide services to the Municipal Transportation Agency, those
departments must give the highest priority to the delivery of such services.
   (e)   At the same time, this Article is intended to ensure sufficient
oversight of the Municipal Transportation Agency by, among other things,
preserving the role of the City's Controller as to financial matters, the City
Attorney as to legal matters, and the Civil Service Commission, as to merit
system issues. In addition, this Article requires that outside audits be
performed to ensure that required service levels are obtained with a minimum of
waste.
   (f)   Finally, this Article is intended to strengthen the Municipal
Transportation Agency's authority to: 1) manage its employees; 2) establish
efficient and economical work rules and work practices that maximize the
Agency's responsiveness to public needs; and 3) protect the Agency's right to
select, train, promote, demote, discipline, layoff and terminate employees,
managers, and supervisors based upon the highest standards of customer service,
efficiency and competency.
   (g)   The effective management of traffic flow and parking are vital to the
operation of the Municipal Railway. Congestion on city streets causes delays in
transit operations. Therefore, the Municipal Transportation Agency must manage
parking and traffic flow to ensure that transit vehicles move through City
streets safely and efficiently.
   (h)   In addition, the residents of San Francisco require that the Agency:
1) value and protect the safety of pedestrians and bicyclists; 2) reduce
congestion and air pollution through efficient use of the streets; and 3)
protect the City's economic health by giving priority to commercial deliveries
and access to local businesses.
   (i)   The voters find that reducing the carbon emissions from San
Francisco's transit sector is fundamental to the City's health and wellbeing
and shall be among the Agency's policy priorities. Because the Agency has
significant influence on San Francisco's transportation sector, which is
responsible for fully half of the carbon emissions produced within the City,
the voters direct the Agency to develop and implement strategies for
substantially reducing those emissions. The voters further affirm the goals of
the City's Climate Action Plan.
   (j)   This Article shall be interpreted and applied in conformance with the
above goals.
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.101. MUNICIPAL TRANSPORTATION AGENCY.
   (a)   There shall be a Municipal Transportation Agency. The Agency shall
include a Board of Directors and a Director of Transportation. The Agency shall
include the Municipal Railway and the former Department of Parking and Traffic,
as well as any other departments, bureaus or operating divisions hereafter
created or placed under the Agency. There shall also be a Citizens Advisory
Committee to assist the Agency.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors shall have the power, by ordinance, to
abolish the Taxi Commission created in Section
4.133, and to transfer the powers and duties of that commission to the Agency
under the direction of the Director of Transportation or his or her designee.
In order to fully integrate taxi-related functions into the Agency should such
a transfer occur, the Agency shall have the same exclusive authority over taxi-
related functions and taxi-related fares, fees, charges, budgets, and personnel
that it has over the Municipal Railway and parking and traffic fares, fees,
charges, budgets, and personnel. Once adopted, Agency regulations shall
thereafter supercede all previously-adopted ordinances governing motor vehicles
for hire that conflict with or duplicate such regulations.
   (c)   Any transfer of functions occurring as a result of the above
provisions shall not adversely affect the status, position, compensation, or
pension or retirement rights and privileges of any civil service employees who
engaged in the performance of a function or duty transferred to another office,
agency, or department pursuant to this measure.
   (d)   Except as expressly provided in this Article, the Agency shall comply
with all of the restrictions and requirements imposed by the ordinances of
general application of the City and County, including ordinances prohibiting
discrimination of any kind in employment and contracting, such as
Administrative Code Chapters 12B et seq., as amended from time to time. The
Agency shall be solely responsible for the administration and enforcement of
such requirements.
   (e)   The Agency may contract with existing City and County departments to
carry out any of its powers and duties. Any such contract shall establish
performance standards for the department providing the services to the Agency,
including measurable standards for the quality, timeliness, and cost of the
services provided. All City and County departments must give the highest
priority to the delivery of such services to the Agency.
   (f)   The Agency may not exercise any powers and duties of the Controller or
the City Attorney and shall contract with the Controller and the City Attorney
for the exercise of such powers and duties.
(Added November 1999; amended by Proposition A, approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.102. GOVERNANCE AND DUTIES.
   (a)   The Agency shall be governed by a board of seven directors appointed
by the Mayor and confirmed after public hearing by the Board of Supervisors.
All initial appointments must be made by the Mayor and submitted to the Board
of Supervisors for confirmation no later than February 1, 2000. The Board of
Supervisors shall act on those initial appointments no later than March, 1,
2000 or those appointments shall be deemed confirmed.
      At least four of the directors must be regular riders of the Municipal
Railway, and must continue to be regular riders during their terms. The
directors must possess significant knowledge of, or professional experience in,
one or more of the fields of government, finance, or labor relations. At least
two of the directors must possess significant knowledge of, or professional
experience in, the field of public transportation. During their terms, all
directors shall be required to ride the Municipal Railway on the average once a
week.
      Directors shall serve four-year terms, provided, however, that two of the
initial appointees shall serve for terms ending March 1, 2004, two for terms
ending March 1, 2003, two for terms ending March 1, 2002, and one for a term
ending March 1, 2001. Initial terms shall be designated by the Mayor. No person
may serve more than three terms as a director. A director may be removed only
for cause pursuant to
Article XV. The directors shall annually elect a chair. The chair shall serve
as chair at the pleasure of the directors. Directors shall receive reasonable
compensation for attending meetings of the Agency which shall not exceed the
average of the two highest compensations paid to the members of any board or
commission with authority over a transit system in the nine Bay Area counties.
   (b)   The Agency shall:
      1.   Have exclusive authority over the acquisition, construction,
management, supervision, maintenance, extension, operation, use, and control of
all property, as well as the real, personal, and financial assets of the
Agency; and have exclusive authority over contracting, leasing, and purchasing
by the Agency, provided that any Agency contract for outside services shall be
subject to Charter Sections
10.104(12) and
10.104(15) and that the Agency may not transfer ownership of any of the real
property of the City and County without approval from the Board of Directors
and the Board of Supervisors;
      2.   Have exclusive authority to enter into such arrangements and
agreements for the joint, coordinated, or common use with any other public
entity owning or having jurisdiction over rights-of-way, tracks, structures,
subways, tunnels, stations, terminals, depots, maintenance facilities, and
transit electrical power facilities;
      3.   Have exclusive authority to make such arrangements as it deems
proper to provide for the exchange of transfer privileges, and through-
ticketing arrangements, and such arrangements shall not constitute a fare
change subject to the requirements of Sections
8A.106 and
8A.108;
      4.   Notwithstanding any restrictions on contracting authority set forth
in the Administrative Code, have exclusive authority to enter into agreements
for the distribution of transit fare media and media for the use of parking
meters or other individual parking services;
      5.   Have exclusive authority to arrange with other transit agencies for
bulk fare purchases, provided that if passenger fares increase as a result of
such purchases, the increase shall be subject to review by the Board of
Supervisors pursuant to Sections
8A.106 and
8A.108;
      6.   Notwithstanding Section
2.109, and except as provided in Sections
8A.106 and
8A.108, have exclusive authority to fix the fares charged by the Municipal
Railway, rates for off-street and on-street parking, and all other, rates,
fees, fines, penalties and charges for services provided or functions performed
by the Agency;
      7.   Notwithstanding any provision of the San Francisco Municipal Code
(except requirements administered by the Department of Public Works governing
excavation, street design and official grade) have exclusive authority to adopt
regulations that control the flow and direction of motor vehicle, bicycle and
pedestrian traffic, including regulations that limit the use of certain streets
or traffic lanes to categories of vehicles and that limit the speed of traffic;
and to design, select, locate, install, operate, maintain and remove all
official traffic control devices, signs, roadway features and pavement markings
that control the flow of traffic with respect to streets and highways within
City jurisdiction, provided that:
         (i)   Notwithstanding the authority established in subsection 7, the
Board of Supervisors may by ordinance establish procedures by which the public
may seek Board of Supervisors review of any Agency decision with regard to the
installation or removal of a stop sign or the creation or elimination of a
bicycle lane. In any such review, the Agency's decision shall stand unless the
Board of Supervisors reverses the decision of the Agency not later than 60 days
after submission of a request to the Board of Supervisors.
         (ii)   Nothing in this subsection 7 shall modify the authority of
ISCOTT, or any successor body, over the temporary use or occupancy of public
streets, or the authority of the Board of Supervisors to hear appeals regarding
the temporary use or occupancy of public streets.
         (iii)   Nothing in subsection 7 shall modify the power of the Board of
Supervisors to establish civil offenses, infractions and misdemeanors.
         (iv)   Notwithstanding the authority established in subsection 7, to
the extent state law contemplates that Agency action authorized by subsection 7
be effectuated by ordinance, such action shall be effectuated by resolution of
the Board of Directors and shall be subject to referendum in accordance with
Article 14, and, if a referendum petition contains the requisite number of
signatures, the Board of Supervisors shall have the power to reconsider or
repeal the action as provided in
Article 14.
      8.   Have exclusive authority to adopt regulations limiting parking,
stopping, standing or loading as provided by state law and to establish parking
privileges and locations subject to such privileges for categories of people or
vehicles as provided by state law; to establish parking meter zones, to set
parking rates, and to select, install, locate and maintain systems and
equipment for payment of parking fees, provided that:
         (i)   Notwithstanding the authority established in subsection 8, the
Board of Supervisors may by ordinance establish procedures by which the public
may seek Board of Supervisors review of any Agency decision with regard to the
creation or elimination of any preferential parking zone, the creation or
elimination of any parking meter zone, the adoption of any limitation on the
time period for which a vehicle may be parked, or reservation of any parking
space for persons with a disability that qualifies for parking privileges under
state law. In any review of a decision of the Agency pursuant to this section,
the Agency's decision shall stand unless the Board of Supervisors reverses the
decision of the Agency not later than 60 days after submission of a request to
the Board of Supervisors.
         (ii)   Nothing in subsection 8 shall modify the power of the Board of
Supervisors to establish civil offenses, infractions and misdemeanors.
         (iii)   Notwithstanding the authority established in subsection 8, to
the extent state law contemplates that any Agency action authorized by
subsection 8 be effectuated by ordinance, such action shall be effectuated by
resolution of the Board of Directors and, if a referendum petition contains the
requisite number of signatures, shall be subject to referendum in accordance
with
Article 14, and the Board of Supervisors shall have the power to reconsider or
repeal the action as provided in
Article 14.
      9.   Have exclusive authority to establish policies regarding and procure
goods and services for the enforcement of regulations limiting parking,
stopping, standing or loading and the collection of parking-related revenues
and, along with the Police Department, have authority to enforce parking,
stopping, standing or loading regulations;
      10.   Be responsible for chairing the Interdepartmental Staff Committee
on Traffic and Transportation (ISCOTT) or any successor body;
      11.   Be responsible for cooperating with and assisting the Police
Department in the promotion of traffic safety; studying and responding to
complaints related to street design, traffic control devices, roadway features
and pavement markings; collecting compiling and analyzing traffic data and
traffic accident data and planning improvements to improve the safety of the
City's roadways; and conducting traffic research and planning;
      12.   Have exclusive authority to apply for, accept, and expend state,
federal, or other public or private grant funds for Agency purposes;
      13.   To the maximum extent permitted by law, with the concurrence of the
Board of Supervisors, and notwithstanding the requirements and limitations of
Sections
9.107,
9.108, and
9.109, have authority without further voter approval to incur debt for Agency
purposes and to issue or cause to be issued bonds, notes, certificates of
indebtedness, commercial paper, financing leases, certificates of participation
or any other debt instruments. Upon recommendation from the Board of Directors,
the Board of Supervisors may authorize the Agency to incur on behalf of the
City such debt or other obligations provided: 1) the Controller first certifies
that sufficient unencumbered balances are expected to be available in the
proper fund to meet all payments under such obligations as they become due; and
2) any debt obligation, if secured, is secured by revenues or assets under the
jurisdiction of the Agency.
      14.   Have the authority to conduct investigations into any matter within
its jurisdiction through the power of inquiry, including the power to hold
public hearings and take testimony, and to take such action as may be necessary
to act upon its findings; and
      15.   Exercise such other powers and duties as shall be prescribed by
ordinance of the Board of Supervisors.
   (c)   The Agency's Board of Directors shall:
      1.   Appoint a Director of Transportation, who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board. The Director of Transportation shall be employed
pursuant to an individual contract. His or her compensation shall be comparable
to the compensation of the chief executive officers of the public
transportation systems in the United States which the Board of Directors, after
an independent survey, determine most closely resemble the Agency in size,
mission, and complexity. In addition, the Board of Directors shall provide an
incentive compensation plan consistent with the requirements of Section
8A.104(k) under which a portion of the Director's compensation is based on
achievement of service standards adopted by the Board of Directors.
      2.   Appoint an executive secretary who shall be responsible for
administering the affairs of the Board of Directors and who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Board.
      3.   In addition to any training that may be required by City, State or
federal law, attend a minimum of four hours of training in each calendar year,
provided by the City Attorney and the Controller regarding the legal and
financial responsibilities of the Board and the Agency.
   (d)   The Director of Transportation shall appoint all subordinate personnel
of the Agency, including deputy directors. The deputy directors shall serve at
the pleasure of the Director of Transportation.
   (e)   Upon recommendation of the City Attorney and the approval of the Board
of Directors, the City Attorney may compromise, settle, or dismiss any
litigation, legal proceedings, claims, demands or grievances which may be
pending for or on behalf of, or against the Agency relative to any matter or
property solely under the Agency's jurisdiction. Unlitigated claims or demands
against the Agency shall be handled as set forth in Charter Section
6.102. Any payment pursuant to the compromise, settlement, or dismissal of such
litigation, legal proceedings, claims, demands, or grievances, unless otherwise
specified by the Board of Supervisors, shall be made from the Municipal
Transportation Fund.
   (f)   The Agency's Board of Directors, and its individual members, shall
deal with administrative matters solely through the Director of Transportation
or his or her designees. Any dictation, suggestion, or interference by a
director in the administrative affairs of the Agency, other than through the
Director of Transportation or his or her designees, shall constitute official
misconduct; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall restrict the
Board of Directors' powers of hearing and inquiry as provided in this Section.
   (g)   Notwithstanding any provision of Chapter 6 or 21 of the Administrative
Code establishing any threshold amount for exercise of executive authority to
execute contracts, or any successor provision of the San Francisco Municipal
Code, the Agency's Board of Directors may adopt threshold amounts under which
the Director of Transportation and his or her designees may approve contracts.
   (h)   Except provided in this Article, the Agency shall be subject to the
provisions of this Charter applicable to boards, commissions, and departments
of the City and County, including Sections
2.114,
3.105,
4.101,
4.103,
4.104,
4.113,
6.102,
9.118,
16.100, and
A8.346. Sections
4.102,
4.126, and
4.132 shall not be applicable to the Agency.
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.103. SERVICE STANDARDS AND ACCOUNTABILITY.
   (a)   The Municipal Railway shall provide a level of service measured in
service hours which is not less than that provided under the schedule of
service published in the April 1996 timetable, although not necessarily in that
configuration.
   (b)   By July 1 of each year, the Agency shall adopt mile-stones toward
achievement of the goals specified in subsections (c) and (d). Milestones shall
be adopted for each mode of transportation of the Municipal Railway, and for
the Municipal Railway as a whole, with the goal of full achievement of the
standards set in subsection (c).
   (c)   The standards for the Agency with respect to the services provided by
the Municipal Railway shall include the following minimum standards for on-time
performance and service delivery:
      1.   On-time performance: at least 85 percent of vehicles must run on-
time, where a vehicle is considered on-time if it is no more than one minute
early or four minutes late as measured against a published schedule that
includes time points; and
      2.   Service delivery: 98.5 percent of scheduled service hours must be
delivered, and at least 98.5 percent of scheduled vehicles must begin service
at the scheduled time.
   (d)   The Board of Directors shall adopt Agency rules setting additional
measurable standards for system reliability, system performance, staffing
performance, and customer service, including:
      1.   Passenger, public, and employee safety and security;
      2.   Coverage of neighborhoods and equitable distribution of service;
      3.   Level of crowding;
      4.   Frequency and mitigation of accidents and breakdowns;
      5.   Improvements in travel time, taking into account adequate recovery
and lay-over times for operators;
      6.   Vehicle cleanliness, including absence of graffiti;
      7.   Quality and responsiveness of customer service;
      8.   Employee satisfaction;
      9.   Effectiveness of the preventive maintenance program; and
      10.   Frequency and accuracy of communications to the public.
      11.   The Agency's duties related to parking and traffic functions and
any other functions that may be added to the Agency's responsibilities.
   (e)   The Board of Directors shall adopt Agency rules setting forth the
methods by which performance shall be measured with respect to each standard
established pursuant to subsections (c) or (d) above in accordance with
industry best practices to enhance the Agency's ability to compare its
performance to that of other comparable transit systems. The Agency shall
regularly publish reports documenting the Agency's performance for each
standard. Each performance report shall note any changes in the rules governing
the methods by which performance is measured so as to inform interpretation of
performance trends over time. Nothing herein shall prohibit the Agency from
using additional performance measures.
   (f)   The Agency shall issue a Climate Action Plan to the Board of
Supervisors and the Commission on the Environment by January 1, 2009, and every
two years thereafter. The plan shall describe measures taken and progress made
toward the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions from San Francisco's
transportation sector to 80% of 1990 levels by 2012 and shall further address
progress toward the following goals:
      1.   Zero greenhouse gas emissions for Municipal Railway transit
vehicles;
      2.   Lowering energy consumption in Agency facilities and by non-transit
vehicles;
      3.   Maximizing waste reduction in Agency operations;
      4.   Increasing transit trips and reducing private vehicle trips within
the City;
      5.   Increasing the use of bicycling and walking as alternate forms of
transportation; and
      6.   Improving regional transit connections to reduce private vehicle use
by commuters.
      No later than January 1, 2010, and no less than every ten years
thereafter, the Board of Supervisors shall adopt legislation setting goals for
reducing greenhouse gas emissions from San Francisco's transportation sector,
and other climate action measures set forth above, for periods after 2012.
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.104. PERSONNEL AND MERIT SYSTEM.
   (a)   The Agency shall establish its own personnel/labor relations office.
The Director of Transportation shall appoint a personnel/labor relations
manager, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Director of Transportation and
shall establish regular meetings with labor to discuss issues within the scope
of representation on terms to be determined through collective bargaining.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the Agency shall be
governed by the rules of the civil service system administered by the City and
appeals provided in civil service rules shall be heard by the City's Civil
Service Commission. Unless otherwise agreed by the Agency and affected employee
organizations, appeals to the Civil Service Commission shall include only those
matters within the jurisdiction of the Civil Service Commission which
establish, implement, and regulate the civil service merit system as listed in
Section
A8.409-3.
   (c)   Effective July 1, 2000, except for the administration of health
services, the Agency shall assume all powers and duties vested in the
Department of Human Resources and the Director of Human Resources under
Articles X and XI of this Charter in connection with job classifications within
the Agency performing "service-critical" functions. Except for the matters set
forth in subsection (f), the Department of Human Resources and the Director of
Human Resources shall maintain all powers and duties under Articles X and XI as
to all other Agency employees.
   (d)   On or before April 15, 2000, the Agency shall designate "service-
critical" classifications and functions for all existing classifications used
by the Municipal Railway; provided, however, that employees in classifications
designated as "service-critical" shall continue to be covered by any Citywide
collective bargaining agreement covering their classifications until the
expiration of that agreement.
   (e)   For purposes of this Article, "service-critical" functions are:
      1.   Operating a transit vehicle, whether or not in revenue service;
      2.   Controlling dispatch of, or movement of, or access to, a transit
vehicle;
      3.   Maintaining a transit vehicle or equipment used in transit service,
including both preventive maintenance and overhaul of equipment and systems,
including system-related infrastructure;
      4.   Regularly providing information services to the public or handling
complaints; and
      5.   Supervising or managing employees performing functions enumerated
above.
      The Agency shall consult with affected employee organizations before
designating particular job classifications as performing "service-critical"
functions. If an employee organization disagrees with the Agency's designation
of a particular job classification as "service-critical" pursuant to the above
standards, the organization may, within seven days of the Agency's decision,
request immediate arbitration. The arbitrator shall be chosen pursuant to the
procedures for the selection of arbitrators contained in the memorandum of
understanding of the affected employee organization. The arbitrator shall
determine only whether the Agency's designation is reasonable based on the
above standards. The arbitrator's decision shall be final and binding.
      The Agency may designate functions other than those listed above, and the
job classifications performing those additional functions, as "service-
critical," subject to the consultation and arbitration provisions of this
Section. In deciding a dispute over such a designation, the arbitrator shall
decide whether the job functions of the designated classes relate directly to
achievement of the goals and milestones adopted pursuant to Section
8A.103 and are comparable to the above categories in the extent to which they
are critical to service.
   (f)   In addition, the Agency shall, with respect to all Agency employees,
succeed to the powers and duties of the Director of Human Resources under
Article X to review and resolve allegations of discrimination, as defined in
Article XVII, against employees or job applicants, or allegations of nepotism
or other prohibited forms of favoritism. To the extent resolution of a
discrimination complaint or request for accommodation involves matters or
employees beyond the Agency's jurisdiction, the Agency shall coordinate with
and be subject to applicable determinations of the Director of Human Resources.
   (g)   The Agency shall be responsible for creating and, as appropriate,
modifying Agency bargaining units for classifications designated by the Agency
as "service-critical" and shall establish policies and procedures pursuant to
Government Code sections 3507 and 3507.1 for creation and modification of such
bargaining units. When the Agency creates or modifies a bargaining unit,
employees in existing classifications placed in such bargaining unit shall
continue to be represented by their current employee organizations.
   (h)   The Agency may create new classifications of Agency employees. Such
classifications shall be subject to the civil service provisions of the Charter
unless exempted pursuant to Section
10.104, or subsection (i).
   (i)   The Agency may create new classifications and positions in those
classifications exempt from the civil service system for managerial employees
in MTA bargaining units M and EM in addition to those exempt positions provided
in Section
10.104; provided, however, that the total number of such exempt managerial
positions within the Agency shall not exceed 2.75 percent of the Agency's total
workforce, exclusive of the exempt positions provided in Section
10.104. This provision shall not be utilized to eliminate personnel holding
existing permanent civil service managerial positions on November 2, 1999.
      Persons serving in exempt managerial positions shall serve at the
pleasure of the Director of Transportation. Such exempt management employees,
to the extent they request placement in a bargaining unit, shall not be placed
in the same bargaining units as non-exempt employees of the Agency.
   (j)   The Civil Service Commission shall annually review both exempt and
non-exempt classifications of the Agency to ensure compliance with the
provisions of subsections (h) and (i).
   (k)   Upon the expiration of labor contracts negotiated by the Department of
Human Resources and approved by the Board of Supervisors, and except for
retirement benefits, the wages, hours, working conditions, and benefits of the
employees in classifications within the Municipal Railway designated by the
Agency as "service-critical" shall be fixed by the Agency after meeting and
conferring as required by the laws of the State of California and this Charter,
including Sections
A8.346,
A8.404 and
A8.409. These agreements shall utilize, and shall not alter or interfere with,
the health plans established by the City's Health Service Board; provided,
however, that the Agency may contribute toward defraying the cost of employees'
health premiums. For any job classification that exists both as a "service-
critical" classification in the Agency and elsewhere in City service, the base
wage rate negotiated by the Agency for that classification shall not be less
than the wage rate set in the Citywide memorandum of understanding for that
classification.
   (l)   Notwithstanding subsection (k), the Agency may, in its sole
discretion, utilize the City's collective bargaining agreements with any
employee organization representing less than 10 percent of the Agency's
workforce.
   (m)   In addition to the base pay established in collective bargaining
agreements, agreements negotiated by the Agency relating to compensation for
Agency managers and employees in classifications designated by the Agency as
"service-critical" may provide incentive bonuses based upon the achievement of
the service standards in Section
8A.103(c) and other standards and milestones adopted pursuant to Section
8A.103. Such agreements may also provide for additional incentives based on
other standards established by the Board of Directors, including incentives to
improve attendance. The Board of Directors may also establish a program under
which a component of the compensation paid to the Director of Transportation
and l exempt managers is based upon the achievement of service standards
adopted by the Board of Directors. Notwithstanding any other provision of
Article 8A, all such incentive programs shall be at the sole discretion of the
Agency Board of Directors, subject to any bargaining obligation imposed by
state law.
   (n)   For employees whose wages, hours and terms and conditions of
employment are set by the Agency, the Agency shall exercise all powers of the
City and County, the Board of Supervisors, the Mayor, and the Director of Human
Resources under Sections
A8.404 and
A8.409. The mediation/arbitration board set forth in Section
A8.409-4 shall consider the following additional factors when making a
determination in any impasse proceeding involving the Agency: the interests and
welfare of transit riders, residents, and other members of the public; the
Agency's ability to meet the costs of the decision of the arbitration board
without materially reducing service or requiring that the Agency raise fares in
a manner inconsistent with Section
8A.108(b); and the Agency's ability to efficiently and effectively tailor work
hours and schedules for transit system employees to the public demand for
transit service. Notwithstanding the timelines described in Section
A8.409-4, to be effective the beginning of the next succeeding fiscal year, all
collective bargaining agreements must be submitted to the Board of Directors no
later than June 15 for final adoption on or before June 30.
   (o)   The voters find that for transit system employees whose wages, hours
and terms and conditions of employment are set by the Agency, the Agency's
discretion in establishing and adjusting scheduling, deployment, assignment,
staffing, sign ups, and the use and number of part-time transit system
personnel based upon service needs is essential to the effective, efficient,
and reliable operation of the transit system. In any mediation/arbitration
proceeding under Section 8.409-4 with an employee organization representing
transit system employees, the employee organization shall have the burden of
proving that any restrictions proposed on the Agency's ability to exercise
broad discretion with respect to these matters are justified. To meet this
burden, the employee organization must prove by clear and convincing evidence
that the justification for such restrictions outweighs the public's interest in
effective, efficient, and reliable transit service and is consistent with best
practices. The mediation/arbitration board shall not treat the provisions of
MOUs for transit system employees adopted prior to the effective date of this
provision as precedential in establishing the terms of a successor agreement.
The mediation/arbitration board's jurisdiction shall be limited to matters
within the mandatory scope of bargaining under state law.
   (p)   The voters find that unscheduled employee absences adversely affect
customer service. Accordingly, not later than January 1, 2001, the agency shall
create a comprehensive plan for the reduction of unscheduled absences. In
addition, the Agency shall take all legally permitted steps to eliminate
unexcused absences. Neither the Agency nor an arbitrator shall have authority
to approve or award any memorandum of understanding or other binding agreement
which restricts the authority of the Agency to administer appropriate
discipline for unexcused absences.
   (q)   In addition, the voters find that Agency service has been impaired by
the existence of side-letters and reliance on "past practices" that have been
treated as binding or precedential but have not been expressly authorized by
the Board of Directors or the Director of Transportation, and have not been and
are not subject to public scrutiny. Accordingly, for employees whose wages,
hours and terms and conditions of employment are set by the Agency, no side-
letter or practice within the scope of bargaining may be deemed binding or
precedential by the Agency or any arbitrator unless the side-letter or practice
has been approved in writing by the Director of Transportation or, where
appropriate, by the Board of Directors upon the recommendation of the Director
of Transportation and appended to the MOU of the affected employee organization
or organizations subject to the procedures set out in this charter. No MOU or
arbitration award approved or issued after the November 2010 general election
shall provide or require that work rules or past practices remain unchanged
during the life of the MOU, unless the specific work rules or past practices
are explicitly set forth in the MOU. All side-letters shall expire no later
than the expiration date of the MOU.
   (r)   Before adopting any tentative agreement with an employee organization
covering matters within the scope of representation, the Agency shall, at a
duly noticed public meeting, disclose in writing the contents of such tentative
agreement, a detailed analysis of the proposed agreement, a comparison of the
differences between the agreement reached and the prior agreement, an analysis
of all costs for each year of the term of such agreement, and whether funds are
available to cover these costs. Such tentative agreement between the Agency and
employee organization shall not be approved by the Agency until 15 calendar
days after the above disclosures have been made.
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007; Proposition
G, Approved 11/2/2010)
SEC. 8A.105. MUNICIPAL TRANSPORTATION FUND.
   (a)   There is hereby established a fund to provide a predictable, stable,
and adequate level of funding for the Agency, which shall be called the
Municipal Transportation Fund. The fund shall be maintained separate and apart
from all other City and County funds. Monies therein shall be appropriated,
expended, or used by the Agency solely and exclusively for the operation
including, without limitation, capital improvements, management, supervision,
maintenance, extension, and day-to-day operation of the Agency, including any
division subsequently created or incorporated into the Agency and performing
transportation-related functions. Monies in the Fund may not be used for any
other purposes than those identified in this Section
8A.105.
   (b)   Beginning with the fiscal year 2000-2001 and in each fiscal year
thereafter, there is hereby set aside to the Municipal Transportation Fund the
following:
      1.   An amount (the "Base Amount") which shall be no less than the amount
of all appropriations from the General Fund, including all supplemental
appropriations, for the fiscal year 1998-1999 or the fiscal year 1999-2000,
whichever is higher (the "Base Year"), adjusted as provided in subsection (c),
below, for (1) the Municipal Railway; and (2) all other City and County
commissions, departments and agencies providing services to the Municipal
Railway, including the Department of Human Resources and the Purchasing
Department, for the provision of those services. The Base Amount for the
Department of Parking and Traffic and the Parking Authority shall be
established in the same fashion but using fiscal years 2000-2001 and 2001-2002
for the services being incorporated into the Agency.
      2.   Subject to the limitations and exclusions in Section
4.113, the revenues of the Municipal Railway, and, upon their incorporation
into the Agency, the revenues of the Department of Parking and Traffic, and the
Parking Authority; and
      3.   All other funds received by the City and County from any source,
including state and federal sources, for the support of the Agency.
   (c)   The Base Amount shall initially be determined by the Controller.
Adjustments to the Base Amount shall be made as follows:
      1.   The Base Amount shall be adjusted for each year after fiscal year
2000-2001 by the Controller based on calculations consistent from year to year,
by the percentage increase or decrease in aggregate City and County
discretionary revenues. In determining aggregate City and County discretionary
revenues, the Controller shall only include revenues received by the City which
are unrestricted and may be used at the option of the Mayor and the Board of
Supervisors for any lawful City purpose. Additionally, in determining aggregate
City and County discretionary revenues, the Controller shall not include
revenues received by the City under the increased rates in Business and Tax
Regulations Code Sections 953.1(g), 953.2(h), 953.3(h), 953.4(e), 953.5(d),
953.6(f), 953.7(d), and 953.8(i) adopted by the voters at the general municipal
election on November 3, 2020, and shall not include revenues received by the
City under Article 36 of the Business and Tax Regulations Code adopted by the
voters at the general municipal election on November 3, 2020. Errors in the
Controller’s estimate of discretionary revenues for a fiscal year shall be
corrected by adjustment in the next year’s estimate.
      2.   An adjustment shall also be made for any increases in General Fund
appropriations to the Agency in subsequent years to provide continuing services
not provided in the Base Year, but excluding additional appropriations for one-
time expenditures such as capital expenditures or litigation judgments and
settlements.
      3.   Commencing with the fiscal year beginning on July 1, 2015, the
Controller shall also adjust the Base Amount annually by the percentage
increase in the San Francisco population based on data from the source(s) the
Controller, in his or her sole discretion, finds most reliable for the most
recent available calendar year. The Controller's population growth adjustment
shall be based on the greater of the increase in daytime or night-time
population. For any year in which the Controller determines that neither the
daytime nor night-time population has increased, the Controller shall make no
adjustment under this subparagraph 3 to the Base Amount. For purposes of the
initial adjustment for the year commencing July 1, 2015, the Controller shall
adjust the Base Amount based on the increase in City daytime or night-time
population for the most recent ten-year period for which data are available
instead of the most recent available calendar year. The Agency shall use the
amount of any increase in the Base Amount resulting from the adjustment
required by this subparagraph 3 exclusively as follows: 75 per cent shall be
used to make transit system improvements to the Municipal Railway to improve
the system's reliability, frequency of service, capacity, and state of good
repair, and 25 per cent shall be used for transportation capital expenditures
to improve street safety for all users.
   (d)   The Treasurer shall set aside and maintain the amounts required to be
set aside by this Section, together with any interest earned thereon, in the
Municipal Transportation Fund, and any amounts unspent or uncommitted at the
end of any fiscal year shall be carried forward, together with interest
thereon, to the next fiscal year for the purposes specified in this Article.
   (e)   It is the policy of the City and County of San Francisco to use
parking-related revenues to support public transit. To that end, the following
parking-related revenues deposited in the Transportation Fund shall be used to
support the capital and operating expenses arising from the Agency's transit
functions:
      1.   Revenues from parking meters, except those amounts collected from
parking meters operated by the Recreation and Park Department and the Port
Commission and except to the extent that they are required by law to be
dedicated to other traffic regulation and control functions;
      2.   Revenues from off-street parking facilities under the jurisdiction
of the Agency (excluding facilities owned by the Parking Authority), including
facilities leased to private owners and non-profit corporations, except those
amounts generated from any parking on or below any land or facilities under the
jurisdiction of the Recreation and Park Department and except those amounts
obligated by contract executed before 1993 to pay debt service;
      3.   Revenues from fines, forfeited bail, or penalties for parking
violations, except those amounts to be credited to the courthouse construction
fund as provided in Administrative Code Section 10.100-353.
   (f)   In addition, there is hereby set aside from the general revenues of
the City and County and deposited in the Transportation Fund to support the
Agency's transit services an amount equivalent to 80 percent of the revenues
received from the City's tax on occupation of parking spaces. Additional
amounts appropriated as a result of this subsection after July 1, 2008 which
were not previously available to support transit service shall be used
exclusively to:
      1.   support implementation of the transit service improvements
recommended by the Transit Effectiveness Project or any subsequent system-wide
route and service evaluation, with first priority given to the hiring of full
time on-going staff and expansion of training for Agency employees, supervisors
and managers; and
      2.   support the creation of a Labor-Management Implementation and
Service Improvement Committee consisting of the Director of Transportation and
a designated representative of each union representing Agency employees. This
committee shall meet quarterly to discuss implementation of this Section and
ongoing system challenges.
(Added November 1999; amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007; Proposition
B, Approved 11/4/2014; Proposition_F, Approved 11/3/2020)
SEC. 8A.106. BUDGET.
   The Agency shall be subject to the provisions of
Article IX of this Charter except:
   (a)   No later than May 1 of each even-numbered year, after professional
review, public hearing and after receiving the recommendations of the Citizens'
Advisory Council, the Agency shall submit its proposed budget with annual
appropriation detail in a form approved by the Controller for each of the next
two fiscal years to the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors for their review and
consideration. The Agency shall propose a budget that is balanced without the
need for additional funds over the Base Amount, but may include fare increases
and decreases, and reductions or abandonment of service. The Mayor shall submit
the budget to the Board of Supervisors, without change. Should the Agency
request additional general fund support over the Base Amount, it shall submit
an augmentation request for those funds in the standard budget process and
subject to normal budgetary review and amendment under the general provisions
of
Article IX.
   (b)   At the time the budget is adopted, the Agency shall certify that the
budget is adequate in all respects to make substantial progress towards meeting
the performance standards established pursuant to Section
8A.103 for the fiscal year covered by the budget.
   (c)   No later than August 1, the Board of Supervisors may allow the
Agency's budget to take effect without any action on its part or it may reject
but not modify the Agency's budget by a seven-elevenths' vote. Any fare change,
route abandonment, or revenue measure proposed in the budget shall be
considered accepted unless rejected by a seven-elevenths' vote on the entire
budget. Should the Board reject the budget, it shall make additional interim
appropriations to the Agency from the Municipal Transportation Fund sufficient
to permit the Agency to maintain all operations through the extended interim
period until a budget is adopted. Any request for appropriation of General Fund
revenues in excess of the Base Amount shall be approved, modified, or rejected
under the general provisions of
Article IX.
   (d)   No later than May 1 of each odd-numbered year, the Agency shall submit
any budget amendment that may be required to increase appropriations over those
approved in the two year budget or as may be required by law, provided that
such budget amendment shall establish a detailed plan with appropriation detail
only for those anticipated revenues and expenditures exceeding those approved
in the two year budget or as otherwise required by law. The Agency may submit
to the Board of Supervisors such additional budget amendments or modifications
during the term of the budget, including but not limited to amendments
reflecting fare changes, route abandonments and revenue measures, as may be
required in the discretion of the Agency. The Board of Supervisors may allow
any budget amendment to take effect without any action on its part or it may
reject but not modify the budget amendment by a seven-elevenths' vote taken
within 30 days after its submission to the Board of Supervisors.
   (e)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter or requirements
of the Annual Salary Ordinance, the Controller may authorize the Agency to move
funds within its budget and hire personnel without specific Controller approval
so long as the Agency's periodic and verifiable projections of spending by the
Agency show the Controller that the Agency's spending will be within the
approved budget. However, should the projections show that the Agency spending
is likely to exceed its budget, the Controller may impose appropriate controls
in his or her discretion to keep the Agency within budget.
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.107. MUNICIPAL TRANSPORTATION QUALITY REVIEW.
   (a)   The Agency shall biennially contract with a nationally recognized
management or transportation consulting firm with offices in the City and
County for an independent review of the quality of its operations. The contract
shall be competitively bid and approved by the Controller and Board of
Supervisors. The review shall contain:
      1.   A detailed analysis of the extent to which the Agency has met the
goals, objectives, and performance standards it is required to adopt under
Section
8A.103, and the extent to which the Agency is expected to meet those goals,
objectives, and performance standards in the two fiscal years for which the
review is submitted, and independent verification of the Agency's reported
performance under the performance measures adopted pursuant to Section 4 of
this measure; and
      2.   Such recommendations for improvement in the operation of the Agency
as the firm conducting the review deems appropriate.
   (b)   The results of the review shall be presented promptly to the Citizens'
Advisory Council, the Agency, the Board of Supervisors, and the Mayor by the
reviewing firm; and the Citizens' Advisory Council, the Agency, and the Board
of Supervisors shall each promptly hold at least one public hearing thereon.
(Added November 1999)
SEC. 8A.108. FARE CHANGES AND ROUTE ABANDONMENTS.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, any proposed change in
fares or route abandonments shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors as
part of the Agency's budget or as a budget amendment under Section
8A.106, and may be rejected at that time by a seven-elevenths vote of the Board
on the budget or budget amendment. Any changes in fares or route abandonments
proposed by the Agency specifically to implement a program of service changes
identified in a system-wide strategic route and service evaluation such as the
Transit Effectiveness Project may only be rejected by a single seven-elevenths'
vote of the Board of Supervisors on the budget or budget amendment.
   (b)   The Agency shall base any proposed change in Municipal Railway fares
on the following criteria:
      1.   The Municipal Railway's need for additional funds for operations and
capital improvements and optimal maintenance of assets.
      2.   The extent to which the increase is necessary to meet the goals,
objectives, and performance standards previously established by the Agency
pursuant to Section
8A.103.
      3.   The extent to which the Agency has diligently sought other sources
of funding for the operations and capital improvements of the Municipal
Railway.
      4.   The need to keep Municipal Railway fares low to encourage maximum
patronage.
      5.   The need to increase fares gradually over time to keep pace with
inflation and avoid large fare increases after extended periods without a fare
increase.
   (c)   For purposes of this Article, a "route abandonment" shall mean the
permanent termination of service along a particular line or service corridor
where no reasonably comparable substitute service is offered. If the Agency
proposes to abandon a route at any time other than as part of the budget
process as provided in Section
8A.106, it shall first submit the proposal to the Board of Supervisors. The
Board of Supervisors may, after a noticed public hearing, reject the proposed
route abandonment by a seven-elevenths vote of its members taken within 30 days
after the proposal is submitted by the Agency.
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.109. ADDITIONAL SOURCES OF REVENUE.
   (a)   To the extent allowed by law, the Board of Supervisors may, by
ordinance, dedicate to the Agency revenues from sources such as gas taxes,
motor vehicle licensing taxes or other available motor vehicle-related revenue
sources.
   (b)   The Mayor, the Board of Supervisors, and the Agency diligently shall
seek to develop new sources of funding for the Agency's operations, including
sources of funding dedicated to the support of such operations, which can be
used to supplement or replace that portion of the Municipal Transportation Fund
consisting of appropriations from the General Fund of the City and County.
Unless prohibited by preemptive state law, the Agency may submit any proposal
for increased or reallocated funding to support all or a portion of the
operations of the Agency, including, without limitation, a tax or special
assessment directly to the electorate for approval, or to the owners of
property or businesses to be specially assessed, or to any other persons or
entities whose approval may be legally required, without the further approval
of the Mayor or the Board of Supervisors. The Agency shall be authorized to
conduct any necessary studies in connection with considering, developing, or
proposing such revenue sources.
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.110. PLANNING AND ZONING.
   The planning and zoning provisions of this Charter and the Planning Code, as
they may be amended from time to time, shall apply to all real property owned
or leased by the Agency but shall not impede the Agency's exclusive authority
to set rates and other charges pursuant to Section
8A.102(b)(5).
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.111. CITIZENS' ADVISORY COUNCIL.
   The Agency shall establish a Citizens' Advisory Council of fifteen members
which shall consist of one person appointed by each member of the Board of
Supervisors and four members appointed by the Mayor. Each member must be a
resident of the City and County. No fewer than ten members of the Council must
be regular riders of the Municipal Rail-way. At least two members must use the
Municipal Railway's paratransit system, and at least three of the members must
be senior citizens over the age of 60. The membership of the Council shall be
reflective of the diversity and neighborhoods of the City and County. The
Council may provide recommendations to the Agency with respect to any matter
within the jurisdiction of the Agency and shall be allowed to present reports
to the Agency's board of directors. The members of the Council shall be
appointed to four-year terms and shall serve at the pleasure of their
appointing power. Staggered terms for the initial appointees to the Council
shall be determined by lot.
(Added November 1999)
SEC. 8A.112. PARKING AND TRAFFIC
   (a)   The Municipal Transportation Agency Board of Directors shall succeed
to all powers and duties of the former Parking and Traffic Commission.
including the power of members to serve ex officio as members of the Parking
Authority Commission under Section 32657 of the Streets and Highways Code. The
chair of the Agency's board of directors shall designate annually the directors
to serve as members of the Parking Authority Commission. Any person may serve
concurrently as a member of the Agency's board of directors and as a member of
the Parking Authority Commission. It is the policy of the City and County that
the Agency exercise all powers vested by State law in the Parking Authority.
   (b)   It shall be City policy that the offices of Director of Transportation
and Parking Authority Executive Director are not incompatible offices, and the
Director of Transportation may serve ex officio as Parking Authority Executive
Director, but shall not receive any additional compensation for that service.
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.113. PARKING AND TRAFFIC; GOVERNANCE.
   (a)   The Agency shall be responsible for management of parking and traffic
functions within the City, so as to:
      1.   Provide priority to transit services in the utilization of streets,
particularly during commute hours while maintaining the safety of passengers,
pedestrians, cyclists and motorists;
      2.   Facilitate the design and operation of City streets to enhance
alternative forms of transit, such as pedestrian, bicycle, and pooled or group
transit (including taxis);
      3.   Propose and implement street and traffic changes that gives the
highest priority to public safety and to impacts on public transit,
pedestrians, commercial delivery vehicles, and bicycles;
      4.   Integrate modern information and traffic-calming techniques to
promote safer streets and promote usage of public transit;
      5.   Develop a safe, interconnected bicycle circulation network; and
      6.   Ensure that parking policies and facilities contribute to the long
term financial health of the Agency.
   (b)   It shall be City policy that the Agency manage the Parking Authority
so that it does not acquire or construct new or expanded parking facilities
unless the Agency finds that the costs resulting from such acquisition,
construction, or expansion and the operation of such facilities will not reduce
the level of funding to the Municipal Railway from parking and garage revenues
under Section
16.110 to an amount less than that provided for fiscal year 1999-2000, as
adjusted by the Controller for inflation; further provided that it shall be
City policy that before approving the acquisition, construction or expansion of
a parking garage, the Agency's Board of Directors shall make a finding that the
operation of the garage will advance or be consistent with the City's Transit
First Policy.
(Added November 1999; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.114. CABLE CARS.
   In the conduct of the public transportation system there shall be maintained
and operated cable car lines as follows:
      1.   A line commencing at Powell and Market Streets; thence along Powell
Street to Jackson Street; thence along Jackson Street to Mason Street; thence
along Mason Street to Columbus Avenue; thence along Columbus Avenue to Taylor
Street; thence along Taylor Street to a terminal at Bay Street; returning from
Bay and Taylor Streets along Taylor Street to Columbus Avenue; thence along
Columbus Avenue to Mason Street; thence along Mason Street to Washington
Street; thence along Washington Street to Powell Street; and thence along
Powell Street to Market Street, the point of commencement.
      2.   A line commencing at Powell and Market Streets; thence along Powell
Street to Jackson Street; thence along Jackson Street to Hyde Street; thence
along Hyde Street to a terminal at Beach; returning from Beach and Hyde Streets
along Hyde Street to Washington Street; thence along Washington Street to
Powell Street; thence along Powell Street to Market Street, the point of
commencement.
      3.   A line commencing at Market and California; thence along California
Street to a terminal at Van Ness Avenue; returning from Van Ness Avenue along
California Street to Market Street, the point of commencement.
   To fully effectuate the intent of this section, these lines shall be
maintained and operated at the normal levels of scheduling and service in
effect on July 1, 1971; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall
prevent the increasing of the levels of scheduling and service.
(Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 8A.115. TRANSIT-FIRST POLICY.
   (a)   The following principles shall constitute the City and County's
transit-first policy and shall be incorporated into the General Plan of the
City and County. All officers, boards, commissions, and departments shall
implement these principles in conducting the City and County's affairs:
      1.   To ensure quality of life and economic health in San Francisco, the
primary objective of the transportation system must be the safe and efficient
movement of people and goods.
      2.   Public transit, including taxis and vanpools, is an economically and
environmentally sound alternative to transportation by individual automobiles.
Within San Francisco, travel by public transit, by bicycle and on foot must be
an attractive alternative to travel by private automobile.
      3.   Decisions regarding the use of limited public street and sidewalk
space shall encourage the use of public rights of way by pedestrians,
bicyclists, and public transit, and shall strive to reduce traffic and improve
public health and safety.
      4.   Transit priority improvements, such as designated transit lanes and
streets and improved signalization, shall be made to expedite the movement of
public transit vehicles (including taxis and vanpools) and to improve
pedestrian safety.
      5.   Pedestrian areas shall be enhanced wherever possible to improve the
safety and comfort of pedestrians and to encourage travel by foot.
      6.   Bicycling shall be promoted by encouraging safe streets for riding,
convenient access to transit, bicycle lanes, and secure bicycle parking.
      7.   Parking policies for areas well served by public transit shall be
designed to encourage travel by public transit and alternative transportation.
      8.   New transportation investment should be allocated to meet the demand
for public transit generated by new public and private commercial and
residential developments.
      9.   The ability of the City and County to reduce traffic congestion
depends on the adequacy of regional public transportation. The City and County
shall promote the use of regional mass transit and the continued development of
an integrated, reliable, regional public transportation system.
      10.   The City and County shall encourage innovative solutions to meet
public transportation needs wherever possible and where the provision of such
service will not adversely affect the service provided by the Municipal
Railway.
   (b)   The City may not require or permit off-street parking spaces for any
privately-owned structure or use in excess of the number that City law would
have allowed for the structure or use on July 1, 2007 unless the additional
spaces are approved by a four-fifths vote of the Board of Supervisors. The
Board of Supervisors may reduce the maximum parking required or permitted by
this section.
(Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
ARTICLE VIIIB:
PUBLIC UTILITIES
SEC. 8B.120. PREAMBLE.
   The Public Utilities Commission operates the Water, Clean Water and Power
Utilities of the City and County of San Francisco. Hetch Hetchy Water and Power
System is an irreplaceable asset of the people of the City and County of San
Francisco. The system is fundamental to the economic vitality of San Francisco
and the Bay Area. The voters of the City and County of San Francisco are
committed to preserving and protecting the system as well as safeguarding the
extraordinary quality of the water from Yosemite and local watersheds. The
voters find that the protection, maintenance and repair of the system are among
their highest priorities.
   San Francisco faces an unprecedented challenge: to restore its aging water
system to ensure a reliable Bay Area water supply through the next century.
Repairs must be accomplished as quickly as possible to avoid system outages,
which could be caused by natural disasters such as earthquake. In planning for
its future needs and those of its wholesale customers, the City must promote
water conservation and responsible stewardship of its natural resources. The
effectiveness of the City's Public Utilities Commission, which has jurisdiction
over the system, is essential to achieving these goals.
   In addition, San Francisco must upgrade and repair its clean water system to
meet changes in state and federal water quality requirements, and to ensure
reliability of the system, parts of which are outdated, aged or seismically
vulnerable. The voters find that the operation of the clean water system should
not unnecessarily place a disproportionate environmental burden on any
community.
   This measure is intended to enhance public confidence in the City's
stewardship of public utilities by:
   1.   Clarifying that the Public Utilities Commission has exclusive control
of water, clean water and power assets owned or maintained by the City and
County of San Francisco;
   2.   Establishing rates sufficient to meet operation, maintenance and
financial needs of the system based on costs and sound budgeting and auditing
procedures to protect retail ratepayers and reduce interest paid on bonds and
other indebtedness while ensuring public review;
   3.   Establishing the Public Utilities Commission as an independent revenue
department not subject to undue financial pressures to contribute to the City's
general fund;
   4.   Requiring the development of long term Capital, Financial and Strategic
Plans to ensure that the utilities are operated efficiently in accordance with
best public utility practice;
   5.   Authorizing the Public Utilities Commission to independently enter into
certain contracts;
   6.   Giving the Public Utilities Commission the ability to finance needed
capital improvements through revenue bonds or other financing methods
consistent with the powers of other major public utilities in California; and
   7.   Promoting labor stability to ensure that the Capital Improvement Plan
is completed expeditiously and efficiently.
(Added November 2002)
SEC. 8B.121. PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION.
   (a)   Notwithstanding Charter section
4.112, the Public Utilities Commission shall have exclusive charge of the
construction, management, supervision, maintenance, extension, expansion,
operation, use and control of all water, clean water and energy supplies and
utilities of the City as well as the real, personal and financial assets, that
are under the Commission's jurisdiction or assigned to the Commission under
Section
4.132.
   (b)   The Public Utilities Commission may enter into Joint Powers Agreements
with other public entities in furtherance of the responsibilities of the
Commission.
   (c)   Except to the extent otherwise provided in this Article, the Public
Utilities Commission shall be subject to the provisions of Charter sections
4.100 et seq. generally applicable to boards and commissions of the City and
County.
   (d)   The General Manager shall have the authority to organize and
reorganize the department. The General Manager shall adopt rules and
regulations governing all matters within the jurisdiction of the department
subject to section
4.102 as applicable.
   (e)   Ownership or control of any public utility or any part thereof under
the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission may not be transferred or
conveyed absent approval by the Public Utilities Commission and approval by a
vote of the electors of the City at the election next ensuing not less than 90
days after the adoption of such ordinance, which shall not go into effect until
ratified by a majority of the voters voting thereon. Voter approval shall not
be required for sales or transfers of real property declared surplus to the
needs of any utility by the Public Utilities Commission or to leases or permits
for the use of utility real property approved by the Public Utilities
Commission.
(Added November 2002)
SEC. 8B.122. GOALS AND OBJECTIVES RELATED TO WATER AND CLEAN WATER.
   (a)   The Commission shall develop, periodically update and implement
programs to achieve goals and objectives consistent with the following:
      (1)   Provide water and clean water services to San Francisco and water
service to its wholesale customers while maintaining stewardship of the system
by the City;
      (2)   Establish equitable rates sufficient to meet and maintain
operation, maintenance and financial health of the system;
      (3)   Provide reliable water and clean water services and optimize the
systems' ability to withstand disasters;
      (4)   Protect and manage lands and natural resources used by the
Commission to provide utility services consistent with applicable laws in an
environ-mentally sustainable manner. Operate hydroelectric generation
facilities in a manner that causes no reasonably anticipated adverse impacts on
water service and habitat;
      (5)   Develop and implement priority programs to increase and to monitor
water conservation and efficiency system-wide;
      (6)   Utilize state-of-the-art innovative technologies where feasible and
beneficial;
      (7)   Develop and implement a comprehensive set of environmental justice
guidelines for use in connection with its operations and projects in the City;
      (8)   Create opportunities for meaningful community participation in
development and implementation of the Commission's policies and programs; and
      (9)   Improve drinking water quality with a goal of exceeding applicable
drinking water standards if feasible.
(Added November 2002)
SEC. 8B.123. PLANNING AND REPORTING.
   (A)   Planning and Reporting
      The Public Utilities Commission shall annually hold public hearings to
review, update and adopt:
      (1)   A Long-Term Capital Improvement Program, covering projects during
the next 10-year period; including cost estimates and schedules.
      (2)   A Long-Range Financial Plan, for a 10-year period, including
estimates of operation and maintenance expenses, repair and replacement costs,
debt costs and rate increase requirements.
      (3)   A Long-Term Strategic Plan, setting forth strategic goals and
objectives and establishing performance standards as appropriate.
      The Capital Improvement Program and Long-Range Financial Plan shall serve
as a basis and supporting documentation for the Commission's capital budget,
the issuance of revenue bonds, other forms of indebtedness and execution of
governmental loans under this Charter.
   (B)   Citizens' Advisory Committee
      The Board of Supervisors, in consultation with the General Manager of the
Public Utilities Commission, shall establish by ordinance a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to provide recommendations to the General Manager of the Public
Utilities Commission, the Public Utilities Commission and the Board of
Supervisors.
(Added November 2002)
SEC. 8B.124. WATER, CLEAN WATER, AND POWER REVENUE BONDS.
   Notwithstanding, and in addition to, the authority granted under Charter
Section
9.107, the Public Utilities Commission is hereby authorized to issue revenue
bonds, including notes, commercial paper, or other forms of indebtedness, when
authorized by ordinance approved by a two-thirds vote of the Board of
Supervisors, for the purpose of reconstructing, replacing, expanding,
repairing, or improving water facilities, clean water facilities, power
facilities, or combinations of water, clean water, and power facilities under
the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission or for any other lawful
purpose of the water, clean water, or power utilities of the City in
furtherance of the purposes herein provided. The Public Utilities Commission
shall endeavor to finance new power facilities that increase delivery of clean
energy, enhance reliability and safety, and increase sustainability by
incorporating technologies like energy storage and electric vehicle charging,
as well as other technologies that become available. In no event shall the
Public Utilities Commission finance construction of a power plant that
generates electricity using fossil fuels or nuclear energy.
   Any legislation authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds (except for
refunding bonds) under this section shall be subject to the referendum
requirements of Section
14.102 of this Charter. The ordinance authorizing the issuance of such revenue
bonds shall not become effective until 30 days after its adoption.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter or of any ordinance of
the City and County, the Board of Supervisors may take any and all actions
necessary to authorize, issue and repay such bonds, including, but not limited
to, modifying schedules of rates and charges to provide for the payment and
retirement of such bonds, subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   Certification by an independent engineer retained by the Public
Utilities Commission that:
      (1)   the projects to be financed by the bonds, including the
prioritization, cost estimates and scheduling, meet utility standards; and
      (2)   that estimated net revenue after payment of operating and
maintenance expenses will be sufficient to meet debt service coverage and other
indenture or resolution requirements, including debt service on the bonds to be
issued, and estimated repair and replacement costs.
   (b)   Certification by the San Francisco Planning Department that facilities
under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission funded with such
bonds will comply with applicable requirements of the California Environmental
Quality Act.
   Except as expressly provided in this Charter, all revenue bonds may be
issued and sold in accordance with state law or any procedure provided for by
ordinance of the Board of Supervisors.
(Added November 2002; amended by Proposition_A, Approved 6/5/2018)
SEC. 8B.125. RATES.
   Notwithstanding Charter sections
2.109,
3.100 and
4.102 or any ordinance (including, without limitation, Administrative Code
Appendix 39), the Public Utilities Commission shall set rates, fees and other
charges in connection with providing the utility services under its
jurisdiction, subject to rejection – within 30 days of submission – by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. If the Board of Supervisors fails to
act within 30 days the rates shall become effective without further action.
   In setting retail rates, fees and charges the Commission shall:
   1.   Establish rates, fees and charges at levels sufficient to improve or
maintain financial condition and bond ratings at or above levels equivalent to
highly rated utilities of each enterprise under its jurisdiction, meet
requirements and covenants under all bond resolutions and indentures,
(including, without limitation, increases necessary to pay for the retail water
customers' share of the debt service on bonds and operating expenses of any
state financing authority such as the Regional Water System Financing
Authority), and provide sufficient resources for the continued financial health
(including appropriate reserves), operation, maintenance and repair of each
enterprise, consistent with good utility practice;
   2.   Retain an independent rate consultant to conduct rate and cost of
service studies for each utility at least every five years;
   3.   Set retail rates, fees and charges based on the cost of service;
   4.   Conduct all studies mandated by applicable state and federal law to
consider implementing connection fees for water and clean water facilities
servicing new development;
   5.   Conduct studies of rate-based conservation incentives and/or lifeline
rates and similar rate structures to provide assistance to low income users,
and take the results of such studies into account when establishing rates, fees
and charges, in accordance with applicable state and federal laws;
   6.   Adopt annually a rolling 5-year forecast of rates, fees and other
charges; and
   7.   Establish a Rate Fairness Board consisting of seven members: the City
Administrator or his or her designee; the Controller or his or her designee;
the Director of the Mayor's Office of Public Finance or his or her designee;
two residential City retail customers, consisting of one appointed by the Mayor
and one by the Board of Supervisors; and two City retail business customers,
consisting of a large business customer appointed by the Mayor and a small
business customer appointed by the Board of Supervisors. 
      The Rate Fairness Board may:
         i.   Review the five-year rate forecast;
         ii.   Hold one or more public hearings on annual rate recommendations
before the Public Utilities Commission adopts rates;
         iii.   Provide a report and recommendations to the Public Utilities
Commission on the rate proposal; and
         iv.   In connection with periodic rate studies, submit to the Public
Utilities Commission rate policy recommendations for the Commission's
consideration, including recommendations to reallocate costs among various
retail utility customer classifications, subject to any outstanding bond
requirements.
   These provisions shall be effective January 3, 2003 for the setting of
retail rates, fees and charges related to the clean water system. If the voters
approve bonds for the Public Utilities Commission's Capital Improvement Program
at the November 5, 2002 election then the provisions of this section shall take
effect on July 2, 2006 for the setting of retail rates, fees and charges
related to the water system. If the voters do not approve such bonds then this
section will take effect on January 3, 2003.
(Added November 2002)
SEC. 8B.126. PERSONNEL AND MERIT SYSTEM.
   (a)   The General Manager shall be selected under the provisions of Charter
sections
3.100 and
4.102. The General Manager may be employed under an individual contract. His or
her compensation shall be comparable to the compensation of the chief executive
officers of the public water, wastewater and/or power systems in the United
States that the Commission, after an independent survey, determines most
closely resemble the Public Utilities Commission in size, mission, and
complexity. In addition, the Public Utilities Commission may provide an
incentive compensation bonus plan for the General Manager based on performance
goals established by the Commission.
   (b)   The General Manager may negotiate an individual contract with the
employee appointed to perform the duties of general infrastructure management
and oversight of the Capital Improvement Program subject to approval by the
Commission and notwithstanding Charter Section
A8.409 et seq.
   (c)   For purposes of approving individual employment contracts the Public
Utilities Commission may exercise all powers of the City and County, the Board
of Supervisors, the Mayor, and the Director of Human Resources under
Article XI of this charter. Individual employment contracts shall utilize and
shall not alter or interfere with, the Retirement or Vacation provisions of
this Charter or the Health Plans established by the City's Health Service
Board; provided however, that the Commission may contribute toward defraying
the cost of the employee's health premiums and retirement pick-up.
(Added November 2002)
SEC. 8B.127. CONTRACTING AND PURCHASING.
   Notwithstanding Charter Section
9.118 or any ordinance, the Public Utilities Commission shall have the sole
authority to enter into agreements for the purchase of water; the sale of water
to wholesale customers; and agreements necessary to implement Joint Powers
Agreements with any wholesale water customer.
   In order to promote labor stability and to ensure the Capital Improvement
Program is completed expeditiously and efficiently, the Public Utilities
Commission is authorized, to the extent legally appropriate, to enter into
project labor agreements, with appropriate Building Construction and Trades
Councils, covering significant capital projects.
ARTICLE IX:
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 9.100. BUDGET PROCESS ORDINANCES.
   (a)   The fiscal year for the City and County shall commence on the first
day of July of each year and shall end on the last day of June of the next
succeeding year. The City's budgetary cycle shall be a rolling two-year cycle.
Each year the City shall adopt a new biennial budget that projects revenues and
expenditures for the next two fiscal years. The budgetary cycle shall commence
on the first day of July of each year and shall end on the last day of June
twenty-four months later.
   (b)   On or before June 30 of each year, beginning on July 1, 2010 with
respect to those non-general fund departments proposed by the Mayor and
designated by the Board by ordinance for early implementation, and beginning on
July 1, 2012 as to all other City departments, the Board of Supervisors shall,
except for equipment and capital improvements, enact an interim biennial
appropriation ordinance and not earlier than the 15th day of July, nor later
than the first of August of each year, the Board of Supervisors shall adopt the
proposed biennial budget as submitted or amended and shall adopt the biennial
appropriation ordinance accordingly, which shall supersede the interim
appropriation ordinance.
   (c)   The Mayor shall submit and the Board of Supervisors shall act on
ordinances with respect to the following:
      1.   A schedule and procedures for the orderly preparation and submission
of the biennial proposed budget and for the review and adoption of the
necessary interim and final appropriations ordinances;
      2.   A description of the form of the proposed biennial budget and
appropriation ordinance consistent with the financial records required by
Section
3.105 of this Charter and containing information relating the type and extent
of services to be delivered or revenues to be generated to proposed
expenditures in a manner which, to the extent feasible, allows comparison of
revenue trends as well as expected performance and expenditures between various
fiscal years;
      3.   A procedure to include public participation in the budgetary process
which shall include public hearings conducted by the com-missions, Mayor and
the Board of Supervisors; and
      4.   The form, content and dates of submission of the City's Capital
Improvements and Facilities Maintenance Budgets. The ordinance relating to
Capital Improvement and Facilities Maintenance shall minimally:
         (A)   Require that such budgets be prepared for more than a single
year;
         (B)   Clearly establish distinctions between major, long term
construction, replacement and acquisition projects (Capital Improvements) and
short term repair, minor replacement and maintenance projects (Facilities
Maintenance);
         (C)   Be consistent as to the date of submission with the time
requirements established for the submission of the budget and appropriation
ordinance; and
         (D)   Provide information regarding the estimated completion schedule
for Capital Improvements, the funding source for each and the estimated annual
operating costs thereof.
(Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
SEC. 9.101. PROPOSED BIENNIAL AND MULTI-YEAR BUDGETS.
   (a)   The Mayor shall submit to the Board of Supervisors each year a
proposed biennial budget, ordinances and resolutions fixing wages and benefits
for all classifications and related appropriation ordinances.
   (b)   The proposed biennial budget shall include:
      1.   Estimated revenues and surpluses from whatever sources, to the
extent feasible, for the forthcoming two fiscal years and the allocation of
such revenues and surpluses to various departments, functions and programs to
support expenditures. Proposed expenditures may include such necessary and
prudent reserves as recommended by the Controller; and
      2.   A summary of the proposed biennial budget with a narrative
description of priorities, services to be provided and economic assumptions
used in preparing the revenue estimates.
   (c)   The proposed biennial budget and appropriation ordinances shall be
balanced for each fiscal year so that the proposed annual expenditures of each
fund do not exceed the estimated annual revenues and surpluses of that fund. If
the proposed budget contains new revenue or fees, the Mayor shall submit to the
Board of Supervisors the relevant implementing ordinances at the same time the
biennial budget is submitted.
   (d)   Until the appropriation ordinances are adopted by the Board of
Supervisors, the Mayor may submit to the Board of Supervisors revisions to the
proposed biennial budget, appropriation ordinances, and ordinances and
resolutions fixing wages and benefits.
      The Mayor may instruct the Controller to prepare the draft appropriation
ordinances.
   (e)   The Mayor shall file a copy of the proposed biennial budget at the
Main Library and shall give notice of the budget summary, including making
copies available to the public. Upon final approval of the budget by both the
Board and the Mayor, notice shall be given of the final budget summary.
   (f)   The Board of Supervisors by ordinance may require multi-year budget
plans and other budget planning strategies to be performed by the several
departments and offices of the City and County.
   (g)   No later than February 1 of any even-numbered fiscal year, the Mayor
and the Board of Supervisors by resolution may determine that the upcoming
budgetary cycle or cycles for some or all City departments and offices shall be
a fixed budgetary cycle or cycles in which the biennial budget will remain in
effect for two fiscal years. With respect to the designated City departments
and offices, the Board will not adopt a new budget for the second fiscal year
of such fixed budgetary cycle or cycles, except as provided in subsection (h),
below. But the City shall adjust the biennial budget for the second year of any
fixed budget cycle if certain conditions exist, using the following process:
      1.   If, during the first year of any fixed budgetary cycle, the
Controller projects that the City will experience significant increases or
decreases in revenues or expenditures during the second year of such budgetary
cycle, the Controller shall submit a report to the Mayor and the Board of
Supervisors identifying those increases or decreases.
      2.   The Mayor shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors a
proposed amendment to the biennial budget responding to the Controller's
report. The Board may approve or amend the Mayor's proposed budget amendment
subject to the limitations that apply to the approval of the budget in Section
9.103. The Mayor's proposed budget amendment shall be deemed approved by
operation of law unless the Board finally adopts an amendment to the biennial
budget on second reading no later than July 15.
      3.   The Board's resolution declaring that an upcoming budgetary cycle or
cycles shall be fixed, shall include a definition of the term " significant
increases or decreases in revenues or expenditures," a deadline for the
Controller's submission of a report identifying such increases or decreases,
and a deadline for the Mayor to submit to the Board a proposed amendment to the
biennial budget in response to the Controller's report.
   (h)   Nothing in this section shall limit the ability of the Mayor or a
member of the Board of Supervisors to introduce at his or her discretion an
amendment to a biennial budget at any time during the budgetary cycle.
(Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
SEC. 9.102. CONTROLLER'S OPINION ON REVENUE ESTIMATES.
   The Mayor shall submit to the Controller for review the estimated revenues
contained in the proposed biennial budget and any subsequent revisions. The
Controller shall then provide the Board of Supervisors with an opinion
regarding the accuracy of economic assumptions underlying the revenue estimates
and the reasonableness of such estimates and revisions.
(Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
SEC. 9.103. ADOPTION OF APPROPRIATION ORDINANCES.
   The Board of Supervisors may amend the proposed biennial budget and
appropriation ordinances as follows:
   1.   After review of the Controller's analysis of the Mayor's revenue
estimates, the Board of Supervisors may reduce estimated revenues;
   2.   The Board of Supervisors may increase or decrease any proposed
expenditure in the General Fund or any special, sequestered or other fund so
long as the aggregate changes do not cause the expenditures from each fund to
exceed the amount proposed for expenditures by the Mayor from any such fund;
and
   3.   The Board of Supervisors may increase or decrease any proposed
expenditure for Capital Improvements.
(Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
SEC. 9.104. VETO OF APPROPRIATIONS.
   The Mayor may reduce or reject any expenditure authorized by the Board of
Supervisors, except appropriations for bond interest, redemption or other fixed
charges, within ten days after the adoption of a final biennial or supplemental
appropriations ordinance. Within ten days of receipt of the Mayor's veto
message, the Board of Supervisors may reinstate, in whole or in part, any
expenditure reduced or rejected by the Mayor by a vote of two-thirds of its
members. In overriding any Mayoral veto, the Board of Supervisors shall not
cause the aggregate expenditures for the General Fund or any special,
sequestered or other fund in the appropriation ordinances to exceed the Mayor's
revenue estimate as allocated to such funds.
(Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
SEC. 9.105. MODIFICATIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors may authorize the Controller, upon the request of
the Mayor, other officials, boards or commissions of the City and County to
transfer previously appropriated amounts within the same fund within the same
governmental unit without approval of the Board of Supervisors.
   Amendments to the appropriations ordinance, as finally adopted, may be
initiated by the Mayor or a member of the Board of Supervisors and adopted in
the same manner as other ordinances. No amendment to the appropriations
ordinance may be adopted unless the Controller certifies availability of funds.
   Any appropriation contained in an emergency ordinance shall be deemed to be
an amendment to the final appropriations ordinance.
SEC. 9.106. GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS.
   The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to provide for the issuance of
general obligation bonds in accordance with the Constitution of the State of
California. General obligation bonds may be issued and sold in accordance with
state law or any local procedure adopted by ordinance. There shall be a limit
on outstanding general obligation bond indebtedness of three percent of the
assessed value of all taxable real and personal property, located within the
City and County.
SEC. 9.107. REVENUE BONDS.
   The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to provide for the issuance of
revenue bonds. Revenue bonds shall be issued only with the assent of a majority
of the voters upon any proposition for the issuance of revenue bonds, except
that no voter approval shall be required with respect to revenue bonds:
   1.   Approved by three-fourths of all the Board of Supervisors if the bonds
are to finance buildings, fixtures or equipment which are deemed necessary by
the Board of Supervisors to comply with an order of a duly constituted state or
federal authority having jurisdiction over the subject matter;
   2.   Approved by the Board of Supervisors prior to January 1, 1977;
   3.   Approved by the Board of Supervisors if the bonds are to establish a
fund for the purpose of financing or refinancing for acquisition, construction
or rehabilitation of housing in the City and County;
   4.   Authorized and issued by the Port Commission for any Port-related
purpose and secured solely by Port revenues, or authorized and issued for any
Airport-related purpose and secured solely by Airport revenues;
   5.   Issued for the proposes of assisting private parties and not-for-profit
entities in the financing and refinancing of the acquisition, construction,
reconstruction or equipping of any improvement for industrial, manufacturing,
research and development, commercial and energy uses or other facilities and
activities incidental thereto, provided the bonds are not secured or payable
from any monies of the City and County or its commissions.
   6.   Issued for the purpose of the reconstruction or replacement of existing
water facilities or electric power facilities or combinations of water and
electric power facilities under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission, when authorized by resolution adopted by a three-fourths
affirmative vote of all members of the Board of Supervisors.
   7.   Approved and authorized by the Board of Supervisors and secured solely
by an assessment imposed by the City.
   8.   Issued to finance or refinance the acquisition, construction,
installation, equipping, improvement or rehabilitation of equipment or
facilities for renewable energy and energy conservation.
   Except as expressly provided in this Charter, all revenue bonds may be
issued and sold in accordance with state law or any procedure provided for by
ordinance.
(Amended November 2001)
SEC. 9.108. LEASE FINANCING.
   The City and County may enter into lease financing agreements only with the
assent of the majority of the voters voting upon any proposition for the
authorization of the lease financing. As used in this section, lease financing
shall mean any lease or sublease made between the City and County and any
public agency or authority, a non-profit corporation or a retirement system for
the purpose of financing the acquisition, construction or improvement by the
City and County of real property or equipment.
   The requirements of this section do not apply to:
   1.   Any lease financing which was approved in fact or in principle by a
resolution or ordinance adopted by the Board of Supervisors prior to April 1,
1977; provided, that if the resolution or ordinance approved the lease
financing only in principle, the resolution or ordinance must describe in
general terms the public improvements or equipment to be financed; or
   2.   The amendment or the refunding of a lease financing which is expected
to result in net savings in rental payments to the City and County on a present
value basis, calculated as provided by ordinance; or
   3.   Lease financing involving a nonprofit corporation established for the
purpose of this subsection for the acquisition of equipment, the obligations or
evidence of indebtedness with respect to which shall not exceed in the
aggregate at any point in time a principal amount of $20 million, such amount
to be increased by five percent each fiscal year commencing with fiscal year
1990-1991; provided, however, that prior to each sale of such obligations or
evidence of indebtedness, the Controller certifies that in his or her opinion
the net interest cost to the City will be lower than other financings involving
a lease or leases.
SEC. 9.109. REFUNDING BONDS.
   The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to provide for the issuance of
bonds of the City and County for the purpose of refunding any general
obligation or revenue bonds of the City and County then outstanding. No voter
approval shall be required for the authorization, issuance and sale of
refunding bonds, which are expected to result in net debt service savings to
the City and County on a present value basis, calculated as provided by
ordinance.
SEC. 9.110. BOND ELECTION BY INITIATIVE.
   Proceedings for the authorization and issuance of bonds for the acquisition,
construction or completion of any public utility or utilities may be initiated
by electors in the following manner: Whenever a petition, signed by qualified
electors of the City and County equal in number to at least fifteen percent of
the votes cast for all candidates for Mayor at the last proceeding general
municipal election for Mayor, requesting the Board of Supervisors to submit to
the voters of the City and County a proposition or propositions for incurring
bonded indebtedness for the acquisition, construction or completion of any
public utility or utilities shall be filed with the director of elections, the
Board of Supervisors shall submit to the voters the proposition or propositions
for incurring bonded indebtedness of the City and County for purpose or
purposes set forth in that petition at the next general municipal, statewide or
special municipal election.
SEC. 9.111. GENERAL AUTHORITY.
   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Charter, the City and County
and its commissions shall have the authority to incur and refund indebtedness
as provided by and pursuant to the general laws of the state as such laws are
in force at the time any indebtedness is created or refunded by the City and
County or its commissions. The Controller certifications required by Sections
3.105 and
9.113 shall not apply to any indebtedness, financing leases or agreements for
an exchange of payments based upon interest rates which are entered into in
connection with indebtedness or financing leases, provided that the Controller
first certifies that sufficient unencumbered balances are expected to be
available in the proper fund to meet all payments under such obligations as
they become due.
(Amended June 2, 1998)
SEC. 9.112. REVENUE BONDS OF THE PORT COMMISSION.
   The Port Commission shall have the exclusive power to perform or accomplish
issuance of revenue bonds for Port-related purposes, as provided in Section
B7.305 of this Charter.
SEC. 9.113. GENERAL FISCAL PROVISIONS.
   (a)   Unused and unencumbered appropriations or unencumbered balances
existing at the close of any fiscal year in revenue or expense appropriations
of the City and County for any such fiscal year, but exclusive of revenue or
money required by law to be held in school, bond, bond interest, bond
redemption, pension, trust, utility or other specific funds, or to be devoted
exclusively to specified purposes other than biennial appropriations, and
together with revenues collected or accruing from any source during such fiscal
year, in excess of the estimated revenue from such source as shown by the
biennial budget and the appropriation ordinance for such fiscal year, shall be
transferred by the Controller, at the closing of such fiscal year, to the
General Fund.
   (b)   In the event that funds are not available to meet authorized
expenditures, the Treasurer, upon the recommendation of the Controller, is
authorized to transfer monies among funds held by the Treasurer in the pooled
funds of the City and County which are legally available for such a purpose,
except a pension fund. The Treasurer and the Controller shall set the terms and
conditions of the transfer, taking into account the requirements and nature of
the fund from which the transfer was made. All monies transferred pursuant to
this Section shall accrue interest at not less than the then current rate of
interest earned by the Treasurer on the pooled funds of the City and County. In
no event shall the Controller or the Treasurer cause any transfer of monies
pursuant to this Section if said transfer would be inconsistent with the terms
and conditions of any outstanding bonded indebtedness of the City and County,
including any of its boards or commissions.
   (c)   In the event the Mayor or a member of the Board of Supervisors
recommends a supplemental appropriation ordinance after the adoption of the
budget for any budgetary cycle and prior to the close of the budgetary cycle
containing any item which had been rejected by the Mayor in his/her review of
departmental budget estimates for the budgetary cycle or which had been
rejected by the Board of Supervisors in its consideration of the Mayor's
proposed budget for the budgetary cycle, it shall require a vote of two-thirds
of all members of the Board of Supervisors to approve such supplemental
appropriation ordinance.
   (d)   No ordinance or resolution for the expenditure of money, except the
biennial appropriation ordinance, shall be passed by the Board of Supervisors
unless the Controller first certifies to the Board that there is a sufficient
unencumbered balance in a fund that may legally be used for such proposed
expenditure, and that, in the judgment of the Controller, revenues as
anticipated in the appropriation ordinance for such budgetary cycle and
properly applicable to meet such proposed expenditures will be available in the
treasury in sufficient amount to meet the same as it becomes due.
   (e)   The Board of Supervisors shall have the power to borrow money by the
issuance of tax anticipation notes, temporary notes, commercial paper, or any
other short-term debt instruments in the manner provided by state law or City
ordinance.
   (f)   Biennial appropriations shall expire at the end of the budgetary
cycle, and the City shall have no authority to expend funds from such
appropriations unless and until the Board of Supervisors adopts a new budget,
interim budget, or supplemental appropriation for such expenditures.
   (g)   No City monies shall be drawn from the treasury of the City and
County, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of any money be incurred,
except in pursuance of appropriations or transfers made as provided in the
Charter and the Administrative Code.
(Amended November 2003; Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
SEC. 9.113.5. RAINY DAY RESERVES.
   (a)   Beginning January 1, 2015, there shall be a City Rainy Day Reserve
("the City Reserve") and a School Rainy Day Reserve ("the School Reserve"),
collectively referred to as the Rainy Day Reserves.
Allocations to the Reserves
   (b)   If the Controller projects that total General Fund revenues for the
upcoming budget year will exceed total General Fund revenues for the current
year by more than five percent, the budget shall allocate the anticipated
General Fund revenues in excess of that five percent growth (the excess
revenues) as follows:
      1.   50 percent of the excess revenues to the Rainy Day Reserves, with 75
percent of that amount deposited to the City Reserve and 25 percent to the
School Reserve;
      2.   25 percent of the excess revenues to capital and other one-time
expenditures; and,
      3.   25 percent of the excess revenues to any lawful governmental
purpose.
   (c)   Total monies in the City Reserve may not exceed 10 percent of actual
total general fund revenues, as stated in the City's most recent independent
annual audit. The budget shall allocate excess revenues that would otherwise be
allocated to the City Reserve above the 10 percent cap instead to capital and
other one-time expenditures.
   (d)   The Mayor and the Board of Supervisors may, at any time, appropriate
monies from the capital and other one-time expenditures allocation for capital
projects or for expenditures such as, but not limited to, acquisition of
equipment or information systems.
   (e)   The Mayor and the Board of Supervisors may, at any time, appropriate
monies from the general purpose allocation for any lawful governmental purpose.
Withdrawals from the City Reserve
   (f)   If the Controller projects that total General Fund revenues for the
upcoming budget year will be less than the current year's total General Fund
revenues, or the highest of any other previous year's total General Fund
revenues, the budget may appropriate up to 50 percent of the current balance in
the City Reserve, but no more than the shortfall in total General Fund
revenues, for any lawful governmental purpose in the upcoming budget year.
      1.   If the trigger for withdrawals from the City Reserve was not met in
the current year, the Controller shall calculate the shortfall for the upcoming
budget year by subtracting the total projected General Fund revenues for the
upcoming budget year from the total projected General Fund revenues for the
current year.
      2.   If the trigger for withdrawals from the City Reserve was met in the
current year, the shortfall shall be calculated by subtracting the total
projected General Fund revenues for the upcoming budget year from the highest
of any previous year's total General Fund revenues, plus two percent for each
intervening year.
   (g)   If the City made appropriations from the City Reserve in the current
year and in the immediately preceding budget year pursuant to subsection (f),
the City is not required to allocate any anticipated excess revenues to the
Rainy Day Reserves or to capital and other one-time expenditures for the
upcoming budget year.
   (h)   If the Controller projects that the Consumer Price Index for the
upcoming budget year shall exceed the index for the current year by more than
five percent, the trigger for allocations to the Reserve as set forth in
Subparagraph (b) above shall instead be the percentage of growth in the index
plus two percent. If the Controller projects that the Consumer Price Index for
the upcoming budget year shall be less than the index for the current year, the
trigger for withdrawals from the Reserve as set forth in Subparagraph (f) above
shall instead be the percentage of negative growth in the index. The Controller
shall use for these purposes the San Francisco All Items Consumer Price Index
for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U), or its successor, as reported by the U.S.
Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics.
   (i)   If the Board of Supervisors or the voters take an action that changes
the amount of total General Fund revenues in any material manner, such as
reducing a tax or imposing a new fee, the revenue changes caused by that action
will not be counted as part of the triggers for allocations to the Rainy Day
Reserves or withdrawals from the City Reserve during the year or years in which
the action is first implemented.
   (j)   In conjunction with the year-end close of the budget, the Controller
shall reconcile the revenue projections triggering any budgeted allocations to
or withdrawals from the Rainy Day Reserves with actual revenue results, as
stated in the City's independent annual audit for the years in question, and
rebalance the Rainy Day Reserves, the capital and other one-time expenditures
allocation, and the general purpose allocation accordingly.
Withdrawals from the School Reserve
   (k)   If the San Francisco Unified School District ("SFUSD") projects that
inflation-adjusted per-pupil discretionary revenues for the upcoming fiscal
year will be reduced and that a significant number of layoffs would be required
to balance its budget, the SFUSD Board of Education may approve, by majority
vote, a draw from the School Reserve of up to 50 percent of the current balance
in the School Reserve but no more than the shortfall in inflation-adjusted per-
pupil discretionary revenues, as determined by the SFUSD Board of Education.
Such action shall be transmitted to the Controller, who upon certification of
the SFUSD calculation shall transfer such funds to the SFUSD. For purposes of
this Section, allocations provided from the City to the SFUSD through the
Public Education Enrichment Fund shall not be deemed discretionary.
   (l)   If the triggers for withdrawal from the School Reserve were met in the
current fiscal year, the decline in per-pupil discretionary spending shall be
calculated by subtracting the inflation-adjusted per-pupil discretionary
revenues for the upcoming budget year from the highest of any previous year's
inflation-adjusted per-pupil discretionary revenues.
   (m)   In conjunction with the year-end close of the SFUSD budget, the SFUSD
shall reconcile the revenue projections triggering a budgeted withdrawal from
the School Reserve with actual revenue results, as stated in the SFUSD's
independent audit for the years in question. The SFUSD shall rebalance the
withdrawal allocation and, if necessary, return funds required to rebalance the
Reserve.
   (n)   Given possible changes in State school funding formulae, changes in
local demographic or economic conditions, or other factors, the SFUSD may for a
given fiscal year draw from the School Reserve amounts in excess of the
limitations in subsection (k) or to offset revenue losses that are less than
those that would otherwise permit a draw under subsections (k) and (l). Such
action shall become operative for that fiscal year following approval of two-
thirds of the SFUSD Board of Education and certification by the Controller of
the Board of Education's action.
Transition to New Reserve Structure
   (o)   No later than January 1, 2015, the Controller shall transfer 50
percent of the Rainy Day Reserve existing as of that date to the City Reserve
and 50 percent to the School Reserve.
Two-Year Budget
   (p)   The Controller shall promulgate procedures modifying the Rainy Day
Reserve system, as necessary, to be consistent with the City's adoption of
biennial rather than annual budgets.
(Added November 2003; amended November 2009; November 2014)
SEC. 9.114. MISSION-DRIVEN BUDGET.
   Each departmental budget shall describe each proposed activity of that
department and the cost of that activity. In addition, each department shall
provide the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors with the following details
regarding its budget:
   1.   The overall mission and goals of the department;
   2.   The specific programs and activities conducted by the department to
accomplish its mission and goals;
   3.   The customer(s) or client(s) served by the department;
   4.   The service outcome desired by the customer(s) or client(s) of the
department's programs and activities;
   5.   Strategic plans that guide each program or activity;
   6.   Productivity goals that measure progress toward strategic plans;
   7.   The total cost of carrying out each program or activity; and
   8.   The extent to which the department achieved, exceeded or failed to meet
its missions, goals, productivity objectives, service objectives, strategic
plans and spending constraints identified in subsections (1) through (6) during
the prior year or prior budgetary cycle.
   Departmental budget estimates shall be prepared in such form as the
Controller, after consulting with the Mayor, directs in writing.
(Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
SEC. 9.115. DEPARTMENTAL BUDGET COMMITMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of each officer, department head, board or commission
ultimately responsible for the management of each department to certify to the
Mayor and the Board of Supervisors his/her commitment to perform the programs
and activities with specified levels of performance for specified costs as
outlined in the budget description and other information required by Section
9.114.
SEC. 9.116. DEPARTMENTAL SAVINGS AND REVENUE GAINS.
   Within 30 days of the Controller's issuance of the combined annual financial
report of the City and County, the Controller shall report to the Mayor and
Board of Supervisors regarding the extent to which each department in the prior
fiscal year has recovered additional revenues measured by the difference
between projected and experienced revenues. It shall be City policy for the
Mayor and Board of Supervisors, upon receipt of this report, through the
supplemental appropriations process to give serious consideration to rewarding
those departments that the Controller has certified pursuant to this section
exceeded their revenue goals or met or exceeded departmental operational goals
expending less than has been projected in the budget.
SEC. 9.117. ESTABLISHMENT OF AUDIT COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS.
   On or before the operative date of this Charter and until this requirement
is changed by the Board of Supervisors, the Board of Supervisors shall
establish through its rules an Audit Committee.
   The Audit Committee shall:
   1.   Maintain a direct and separate line of communication between the Board
of Supervisors and the City and County's independent auditor;
   2.   Meet with the independent auditor to review the audited annual
financial statement and the auditor's report on such matters as the quality and
depth of management and compliance;
   3.   Recommend appropriate action to be taken by the Board of Supervisors to
implement recommendations contained in the audit report;
   4.   Follow up, as necessary, to ensure that approved recommendations are
promptly implemented; and
   5.   Perform other duties as assigned by the Board of Supervisors.
SEC. 9.118. CONTRACT AND LEASE LIMITATIONS.
   (a)   Unless otherwise provided for in this Charter, contracts entered into
by a department, board or commission having anticipated revenue to the City and
County of one million dollars or more, or the modification, amendment or
termination of any contract which when entered into had anticipated revenue of
one million dollars or more, shall be subject to approval of the Board of
Supervisors by resolution.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided for in this Charter, and with the exception
of construction contracts entered into by the City and County, any other
contracts or agreements entered into by a department, board or commission
having a term in excess of ten years, or requiring anticipated expenditures by
the City and County of ten million dollars, or the modification or amendments
to such contract or agreement having an impact of more than $500,000 shall be
subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors by resolution.
   (c)   Unless otherwise provided for in this Charter, any lease of real
property for a period of ten or more years, including options to renew, or
having anticipated revenue to the City and County of one million dollars or
more; the modification, amendment or termination of any lease, which when
entered into was for a period of ten or more years, including options to renew,
or had anticipated revenue to the City and County of one million dollars or
more; and any sale or other transfer of real property owned by the City and
County, shall first be approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
Leases of property under the jurisdiction of the Port Commission for maritime
use shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(Amended November 1997)
SEC. 9.119. FIVE-YEAR FINANCIAL PLAN.
   (a)   No later than July 1, 2010, the City shall adopt a five-year financial
plan for those non-general fund departments and offices proposed by the Mayor
and designated by the Board by ordinance for early implementation. The City
shall update that plan and combine it with a five-year financial plan for all
other City departments and offices no later than July 1, 2011. By March 1st of
each odd numbered year thereafter, the Mayor shall propose a five-year
financial plan, and by May 1st of each such year the Board of Supervisors shall
review, amend and adopt the five-year financial plan by resolution.
   (b)   The Mayor and the Board of Supervisors shall use the financial plan as
a tool to plan for upcoming City budgets. The financial plan shall include a
forecast of expenditures and revenues during the five-year period, and actions
proposed to balance revenues and expenditures during each year of the plan. The
plan shall include a summary of each department's strategic goals, resources
allocated in the plan to meet these goals, and changes in service levels
expected given investment levels proposed in the plan.
(Added by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
SEC. 9.120. FINANCIAL POLICIES.
   (a)   The Controller shall propose, and the City shall adopt, long-range
financial policies that are consistent with generally recognized principles of
public finance. The policies shall address, at a minimum, the following issues:
      1.   Creation and maintenance of adequate reserves;
      2.   Use of volatile revenues;
      3.   Issuance of debt; and
      4.   Institution of extraordinary financial and budgetary measures to
facilitate the City's recovery from earthquake, fire, flood, or other physical
calamity.
   The City may not adopt a budget that the Controller determines is
inconsistent with one or more of these policies.
   (b)   The Controller shall recommend an initial set of financial policies to
the Mayor no later than March 1, 2010, and may recommend additional financial
policies or amendments to existing policies no later than October 1 of any
subsequent year. Within 60 days of such recommendation, the Mayor and the Board
of Supervisors shall consider the recommended policies. The City shall adopt
individual financial policies only upon the approval of both the Mayor and the
Board of Supervisors by a two-thirds' vote. The adopted policies shall be
framed as ordinances that shall be codified in the Administrative Code and
identified as financial policies adopted under this Section.
   (c)   Upon a two-thirds' vote, the Board of Supervisors by resolution may
suspend, in whole or in part, any ordinance containing these policies for the
succeeding fiscal year.
(Added by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
ARTICLE X:
PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 10.100. CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.
   There is hereby established a Civil Service Commission which is charged with
the duty of providing qualified persons for appointment to the service of the
City and County.
   The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor,
pursuant to Section
3.100, for six-year terms. Not less than two members of the Commission shall be
women.
   The persons so appointed shall, before taking office, make under oath and
file in the office of the County Clerk the following declaration: "I am opposed
to appointments to the public service as a reward for political activity and
will execute the office of Civil Service Commissioner in the spirit of this
declaration."
   A commissioner may be removed only upon charges preferred in the same manner
as in this Charter provided for elective officers.
   The regular meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and held
at such a time as will give the general public and employees of the City and
County adequate time within which to appear before the Commission after the
regular daily working hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Such person or persons
shall be given an opportunity to be heard by the Commission before final action
is taken in any case involving such person or persons.
SEC. 10.101. GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Civil Service Commission shall adopt rules, policies and procedures to
carry out the civil service merit system provisions of this charter and, except
as otherwise provided in this Charter, such rules shall govern applications;
examinations; eligibility; duration of eligible lists; certification of
eligibles; leaves of absence for employees and officers; appointments;
promotions; transfers; resignations; lay-offs or reduction in force, both
permanent and temporary, due to lack of work or funds, retrenchment or
completion of work; the designation and filling of positions, as exempt,
temporary, provisional, part-time, seasonal or permanent; status and status
rights; probationary status and the administration of probationary periods,
except duration; pre-employment and fitness for duty medical examinations,
except for the conditions under which referrals for fitness for duty
examinations will be made, and the imposition of new requirements;
classification; conflict of interest; and such other matters as are not in
conflict with this Charter; provided, however, that the minimum rule for the
certification of eligibles shall be the Rule of Three Scores, and provided
further that rules for leave due to illness or disability shall be approved by
the Board of Supervisors. Changes to the rules may be proposed by members of
the Commission, the Executive Assistant or the Human Resources Director and
approved or rejected by the Commission. The Commission may, upon ten days'
notice, make changes in the rules, which changes shall thereupon be printed and
be in force; provided that no such changes in rules shall affect a case pending
before the Commission.
   The Commission shall have power to institute and prosecute legal proceedings
for violations of any civil service merit system or Department of Human
Resources provisions of this Charter.
   The Commission shall establish an inspection service for the purpose of
investigating the conduct or an action of appointees in all positions and of
securing records of service for promotion and other purposes. All departments
shall cooperate with the Commission in making its investigations and any person
hindering the Commission or its agents shall be subject to suspension.
   The Commission shall by rule establish procedures to review and resolve
allegations of discrimination as defined in
Article XVII of this Charter or otherwise prohibited nepotism or favoritism
appealed to it pursuant to this section. The determination reached under
Commission procedures shall be final and shall forthwith be enforced by every
employee and officer.
   The Commission shall have the power to inquire into the operation of the
civil service merit system to ensure compliance with merit principles and rules
established by the Commission. After such inquiry, the Commission may direct
the Human Resources Director to take such action as the Commission believes
necessary to carry out the civil service provisions of this Charter. In any
hearing conducted by the Commission or by any hearing officer it appoints
pursuant to this section, the Commission or the hearing officer shall have the
power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of
records.
   The Commission may require periodic reports from the Human Resources
Director in a manner and form which it shall prescribe.
   The Commission may hear appeals from an action of the Human Resources
Director in accordance with its rules, including but not limited to:
   1.   Allegations of discrimination as defined in
Article XVII of this Charter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
Charter except the fiscal provisions hereof, the decision of the Commission
regarding allegations of discrimination shall forthwith be enforced by every
officer and employee;
   2.   Allegations of fraud; and
   3.   Allegations of conflict of interest.
   No action by the Human Resources Director which is the subject of any appeal
shall be stayed during the appeal process except by a majority vote of the
Civil Service Commission.
   The Commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to appoint an
executive assistant to be the administrative head of the affairs under its
control who shall serve at its pleasure; provided, however, that any person who
has Civil Service status in the position of executive assistant to the
Commission on the effective date of this section as amended shall continue to
have Civil Service status in the position of executive assistant under the
Civil Service provisions of this Charter. The executive assistant shall
periodically report to the Commission on operation of the civil service merit
system and may make recommendations to the Civil Service Commission regarding
its rules, policies and procedures.
SEC. 10.102. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
   The Department of Human Resources shall consist of a Human Resources
Director and such employees as may be necessary to carry out its functions and
duties.
   Pursuant to and in accordance with policies, rules and procedures of the
Civil Services Commission governing the merit system, the Department of Human
Resources shall be the personnel department for the City and County and shall
determine appointments on the basis of merit and fitness as shown by
appropriate test and, except as specifically set forth in this Charter, shall
perform all tests, duties and functions previously performed by the Civil
Service Commission, including but not limited to authority to recruit, select,
certify, appoint, train, evaluate, promote career development, classify
positions, administer salaries, administer employee discipline, discharge and
other related personnel activities in order to maintain an effective and
responsive work force.
   The Department of Human Resources shall be responsible for coordination of
all state, local and federal health and safety mandates, programs and
requirements relating to employees including but not limited to industrial
hygiene programs, health and safety programs, OSHA compliance and return to
work programs. Department heads shall coordinate such activities of employees
under their jurisdiction with the Human Resources Director.
   The Department of Human Resources shall be responsible for policy,
management and administration of the worker's compensation program and shall
review and determine all applications for disability leave.
   Subject to Section
11.100 hereof, the Department of Human Resources shall be responsible for
management and administration of all labor relations of the City and County.
   Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Mayor shall deal with the
administration of the civil service merit system solely through the Human
Resources Director and the Civil Service Commission or their designees. The
Mayor shall not dictate, suggest or interfere with the merit system activities
of the Civil Service Commission or Human Resources Department. Administrative
matters shall be dealt with only in the manner provided by this Charter, and
any dictation, suggestion or interference herein prohibited shall constitute
official misconduct; provided that nothing herein contained shall restrict the
power of hearing and inquiry as provided in this Charter.
(Amended November 2004)
SEC. 10.103. HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR.
   A Human Resources Director shall be selected by the Mayor from candidates
nominated by the Civil Service Commission and confirmed by vote of the Board of
Supervisors. The Human Resources Director shall possess not less than ten years
professional experience in personnel, human resources management, labor or
employee relations at least five years of which must be in federal, state or
local governmental personnel management and such other qualifications as
determined by the Commission. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
Charter, the Human Resources Director shall be appointed by and serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor, provided that the Mayor's removal of the Human Resources
Director may be rejected by a four-fifths vote of the Commission. Failure of
the Commission to act within 30 days shall be deemed approval of the Mayor's
action. The nominee of the Mayor may be appointed acting Human Resources
Director pending confirmation. The person so appointed shall, before taking
office, make under oath and file in the Office of the County Clerk the
following declaration: "I am opposed to appointments to the public service as a
reward for political activity and will execute the Office of Human Resources
Director in the spirit of this declaration."
   The appointment of the Director of the Human Resources Department as of the
effective date of this Charter shall be effective until July 1, 1996, after
which time he may be reappointed to the position in accordance with the
appointment method provided herein.
   The Human Resources Director shall have full power to administer the affairs
of the Department. He or she shall have all powers of a department head and may
appoint a Director of Employee Relations, an executive assistant and one
confidential secretary, each of whom shall be exempt from the civil service
provisions of this Charter, to assist in the administration and management of
the functions of the department.
   The Human Resources Director shall review and resolve allegations of
discrimination as defined in
Article XVII of this Charter against employees or applicants, or otherwise
prohibited nepotism or favoritism. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
Charter except the fiscal provisions hereof, the decision of the Human
Resources Director shall forthwith be enforced by every employee and officer,
unless the decision is appealed to the Commission in accordance with Section
10.101.
   The Human Resources Director shall investigate all employee complaints
concerning job-related conduct of City and County employees and shall promptly
report to the source of the complaint.
   The Human Resources Director shall promote effective and efficient
management through personnel programs that encourage productivity, job
satisfaction and exemplary performance.
   The Human Resources Director shall provide a procedure for resolution of
employee disputes which shall be consistent with other provisions of this
Charter and shall be utilized by all department heads and appointing officers
in the absence of an applicable grievance procedure in a binding labor
agreement.
   The Human Resources Director shall verify that all persons whose names
appear on City and County payrolls have been legally appointed to or employed
in positions legally established under this Charter. The Controller shall not
draw his or her warrant for any claim for salary, wages or compensation which
has been disapproved by the Human Resources Director.
   Consistent with the foregoing and other applicable provisions of this
Charter, the Human Resources Director may delegate to the various appointing
officers appropriate personnel responsibilities, and shall consult with
appointing officers with respect to Civil Service Commission rules affecting
their operations.
   The Human Resources Director shall establish a system of job classification.
The decision of the Human Resources Director regarding classification matters
shall be final unless appealed to the Commission; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall be construed to alter the scope of bargaining set forth in
the following sections of the 1932 Charter: 8.400, 8.403, 8.404, 8.405, 8.407-
1, 8.409 et seq. and 8.590-1 et seq.
   The allocation or reallocation of a position shall not adversely affect the
civil service rights of an occupant regularly holding such position. No person
shall hold a position outside of the classification to which the person has
been appointed, provided that every employee of any department or office shall
discharge any of the duties pertaining to such department or office to which
the employee's department head may temporarily assign the employee.
(Amended November 2004)
SEC. 10.104. EXCLUSIONS FROM CIVIL SERVICE APPOINTMENT.
   All employees of the City and County shall be appointed through competitive
examination unless exempted by this Charter. The following positions shall be
exempt from competitive civil service selection, appointment and removal
procedures, and the person serving in the position shall serve at the pleasure
of the appointing authority:
   1.   All supervisory and policy-level positions within the office of the
Mayor and the office of the City Administrator;
   2.   All elected officers of the City and County and their chief deputies or
chief assistants;
   3.   All members of commissions, boards and advisory committees;
   4.   Not more than one commission secretary for each commission or board;
   5.   All heads of agencies and departments, unless otherwise provided for
herein;
   6.   All non-uniformed deputy heads of departments;
   7.   All uniformed deputy heads of departments, police commanders and Fire
Chiefs aides;
   8.   Not more than one confidential secretary and executive assistant in
each department and agency;
   9.   The Clerk of the Board of Supervisors, legislative analyst and
assistants to the members of the Board of Supervisors.
   10.   All paraprofessional aides of the Unified School District and teaching
instructional aides of the Community College District;
   11.   Persons employed in positions outside the City and County upon
construction work being performed by the City and County when such positions
are exempted from the classified civil service by an order of the civil service
commission;
   12.   Persons employed in positions in any department for expert
professional temporary services, when such positions are exempted from said
classified civil service for a specified period of said temporary service by
order of the civil service commission.
      The proportion of full-time employees in the above exempt categories to
the total number of civil service employees of the City and County shall not be
greater than such proportion as existed on July 1, 1994, unless modified by
Civil Service Commission rule, approved by the Board of Supervisors.
   13.   All attorneys, including an attorney to the Sheriff and an attorney
for the Tax Collector, City Attorney's and District Attorney's investigators,
hospital chief administrators, physicians and dentists serving in their
professional capacity (except those physicians and dentists whose duties are
significantly administrative or supervisory);
   14.   The law librarian, assistant law librarians, bookbinder of the Law
Library, purchaser, curators, Assistant Sheriff, Deputy Port Director, Chief of
the Bureau of Maritime Affairs, Director of Administration and Finance of the
Port, Port Sales Manager, Port Traffic Manager, Chief Wharfinger, Port
Commercial Property Manager, Actuary of the Employee's Retirement System,
Director of the Zoo, Chief Veterinarian of the Zoo, Director of the Arboretum
and Botanical Garden, Director of Employee Relations, Health Service
Administrator, Executive Assistant to the Human Services Director, and any
other positions designated as exempt under the 1932 Charter, as amended;
   15.   Positions determined by the Controller and approved annually by the
Board of Supervisors to be positions where the work or services can be
practically performed under private contract at a lesser cost than similar work
performed by employees of the City and County, except where such work or
services are required to be performed by officers or employees of the City and
County under the provisions of this Charter or other applicable law.
      In addition, with the approval of the Civil Service Commission, exempt
employees shall include:
   16.   Temporary and seasonal appointments not to exceed the equivalent of
half-time during any fiscal year, except that such positions may be filled
through regular civil service procedures;
   17.   Appointments, which shall not exceed two years and shall not be
renewable, as substitutes for civil service employees on leave, except that
such positions may be filled through regular Civil Service procedures;
   18.   Appointments, which shall not exceed three years and shall not be
renewable, for special projects and professional services with limited term
funding, except that such positions may be filled through regular civil service
procedures; and
   19.   Entry level positions designated by an appointing officer with
approval of the Civil Service Commission for persons who met minimum
qualifications and are certified as blind or severely disabled; persons so
appointed whose job performance is rated satisfactory by their appointing
officer shall after one year of continuous service acquire Civil Service
status.
SEC. 10.105. PROVISIONAL APPOINTMENTS.
   Provisional appointments for classified positions for which no eligible list
exists shall not exceed three years. Provisional appointments may only be
renewed with the approval of the Board of Supervisors and upon certification by
the Human Resources Director that for reasons beyond his or her control the
Department has been unable to conduct examinations for these positions.
ARTICLE XI:
EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS SYSTEM
SEC. 11.100. GENERAL.
   Subject to this Charter and consistent with state law, the Mayor through the
Human Resources Director or his/her designee and in consultation with the Board
of Supervisors shall be responsible for meeting and conferring with employees
or their recognized employee organizations regarding salaries, working
conditions, benefits and other terms and conditions of employment to be
embodied in memoranda of understanding. The Human Resources Director shall
assume day-to-day administration of all labor relations responsibilities
previously vested in the Mayor or Board of Supervisors.
   The Human Resources Director shall submit proposed memoranda of
understanding including, where applicable, schedules of compensation, benefits
and working conditions to the Mayor, who upon approval shall forward the
proposed memoranda of understanding to the Board of Supervisors for
determination by a majority vote. The Board of Supervisors shall have the power
to accept or reject such memoranda of understanding. It shall be the duty of
the Board of Supervisors, upon approval of any such memoranda of understanding
to enact appropriate ordinances authorizing payment of any compensation or
benefits or other terms and conditions of employment so approved.
   Nothing in this section shall supersede any dates specified in Sections
A8.409-4 and
A8.590-5, or elsewhere in this Charter for fixing compensation, except that.
should the Board of Supervisors reject any memorandum of understanding and/or
schedule of compensation and benefits, the Board of Supervisors shall by motion
simultaneously extend by 45 days from the date of rejection the date for final
submission to the Board of Supervisors of ordinances approving or adopting
salary, benefits and/or working conditions pursuant to such sections.
(Amended by Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009)
SEC. 11.101. EMPLOYEE RELATIONS OFFICE.
   The Human Resources Director shall:
   1.   Represent the City and County and/or its departments in the
implementation of those provisions of Title I, Division 4, Chapter 10 of the
Government Code applicable to the City and County, subject to the Mayor's
authority under Charter Section
11.100;
   2.   Coordinate the meet and confer process between the City and County, its
employees and/or their designated representatives;
   3.   Negotiate and administer memoranda of understanding; and
   4.   Perform related duties necessary to administer the employee relations
functions of the City and County.
ARTICLE XII:
EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT AND HEALTH SERVICE SYSTEMS
SEC. 12.100. RETIREMENT BOARD.
   (a)   The Retirement Board shall consist of seven members as follows: one
member of the Board of Supervisors appointed by the President, three public
members to be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to Section
3.100, and three members elected by the active members and retired persons of
the Retirement System from among their number. The public members appointed by
the Mayor shall be experienced in life insurance, actuarial science, employee
pension planning or investment portfolio management, or hold a degree of doctor
of medicine. There shall not be, at any one time, more than one retired person
on the Board. The term of the members, other than the Board of Supervisors
member, shall be five years, one term expiring on February 20 of each year. The
three elected members need not be residents of the City and County. Vacancies
on the Board shall be filled by the Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired
term, except that in the case of elected employee members, a vacancy shall be
filled by a special election within 120 days after the vacancy occurs unless
the next regularly scheduled employee member election is to be held within six
months after such vacancy occurred. Elections shall be conducted by the
Director of Elections in a manner prescribed by ordinance.
   (b)   The Board shall appoint and may remove an executive director and an
actuary. The executive director may be a joint Chief Executive Officer-Chief
Investment Officer, or a Chief Executive Officer only. The Board may employ a
consulting actuary.
   Any executive director hired on or after January 1, 2023, shall be employed
under an individual contract. Under the contract, the executive director’s
compensation shall be comparable to the compensation of executive directors of
public retirement systems in the United States who perform similar functions
and that the Board, after an independent survey, determines most closely
resemble the Retirement System in size, mission, and complexity. In addition,
the Board may provide an incentive compensation bonus plan for the executive
director based on performance goals established by the Board. For purposes of
approving the executive director’s individual employment contracts, the Board
may exercise all powers of the City and County, the Board of Supervisors, the
Mayor, and the Director of Human Resources under
Article XI of this Charter. The executive director’s individual employment
contract shall not alter or interfere with the Retirement or Vacation
provisions of this Charter or the Health Plans established by the City’s Health
Service Board; provided however, that the Board may contribute toward defraying
the cost of the executive director’s health premiums and retirement pick-up.
   (c)   In accordance with Article XVI, Section 17, of the California
Constitution, the Retirement Board shall have plenary authority and fiduciary
responsibility for investment of monies and administration of the Retirement
System.
   The Board shall be the sole authority and judge, consistent with this
Charter and ordinances, as to the conditions under which members of the
Retirement System may receive and may continue to receive benefits under the
Retirement System, and shall have exclusive control of the administration and
investment of such funds as may be established.
   The Retirement Board shall discharge its duties with respect to the system
with the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances then
prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with
these matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and
with like aims.
   The Board shall determine City and County and District contributions on the
basis of a normal contribution rate which shall be computed as a level
percentage of compensation which, when applied to the future compensation of
the average new member entering the System, together with the required member
contribution, will be sufficient to provide for the payment of all prospective
benefits of such member. The portion of liability not provided by the normal
contribution rate shall be amortized over a period not to exceed twenty years.
   (d)   The Board may act by a majority of the members present at a meeting so
long as a quorum is in attendance.
(Amended by Proposition_A, Approved 11/8/2022)
SEC. 12.101. EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.
   The executive director shall administer the Retirement System in accordance
with the provisions of this Charter and the policies and regulations of the
Retirement Board.
SEC. 12.102. HEARING OFFICER.
   Any application for retirement or death allowance made pursuant to this
Charter shall be heard by a hearing officer employed under contract by the
Retirement Board and selected by procedures set forth in its rules, which shall
include rules setting forth the qualifications and selection procedure
necessary to appoint a qualified and unbiased hearing officer. Following public
hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether such application shall be
granted or denied. All expenses related to processing and adjudicating such
applications shall be paid from the Trust Fund.
   At any time within 30 days after the service of the hearing officer's
decision, the applicant or any other affected party, including the Retirement
System, may petition the hearing officer for a rehearing upon one or more of
the following grounds and no other:
   1.   That the hearing officer acted without or in excess of the hearing
officer's powers;
   2.   That the decision was procured by fraud;
   3.   That the evidence does not justify the decision; or
   4.   That the petitioner has discovered new material evidence which could
not, with reasonable diligence, have been discovered and produced at the
hearing.
   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final upon the expiration of 30
days after the petition for rehearing is denied, or if the hearing is granted,
upon the expiration of 30 days after the rendition of the decision. Such final
decision shall not be subject to amendment, modification or rescission by the
Board, but shall be subject to review by the Board only for the purpose of
determining whether to seek judicial review.
SEC. 12.103. TRUST FUND.
   The Retirement Fund shall be a trust fund to be administered by the
Retirement Board in accordance with the provisions of this Charter solely for
the benefit of the active members and retired members of the Retirement System
and their survivors and beneficiaries. Administrative costs of the Retirement
System, as adopted by the Board of Supervisors in the annual budget shall be
paid from the accumulated contributions of the City and County.
   The Fund is intended to qualify for tax deferred treatment under Section 401
(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the Board is
responsible for preserving the Fund's status.
SEC. 12.200. HEALTH SERVICE BOARD.
   There shall be a Health Service Board which shall consist of seven members
as follows: one member of the Board of Supervisors, to be appointed by the
President of the Board of Supervisors; two members appointed by the Mayor
pursuant to Section
3.100, one of whom shall be an individual who regularly consults in the health
care field, and the other a doctor of medicine; one member nominated by the
Controller and three members elected from the active and retired members of the
System from among their number. Elections shall be conducted by the Director of
Elections in a manner prescribed by ordinance. Elected members need not reside
within the City and County.
   Not later than April 1, 2013 the Controller shall nominate a candidate for
appointment to the Health Services Board for a two-year term commencing on May
15, 2013. The Controller shall transmit a written notice of nomination to the
Health Services Board. The Controller's nominee shall be subject to the
approval of the Health Services Board. If the Health Services Board fails to
calendar the Controller's nomination for consideration at a meeting to occur
not later than 60 days after receipt of the Controller's written notice of
nomination, the Controller's nominee shall be deemed approved. All subsequent
appointments of Controller's nominees shall be for a five-year term and be
subject to the same procedure. The Controller's nominee may not vote on his or
her successor.
   The terms of Health Service Board members, other than the ex officio
members, shall be five years, and shall expire on May 15 of each year, with the
exception that the term of the Board member that begins in May 2011 shall be
three (3) years, and shall expire in May 2014, and the term of the Board member
that begins in May 2013 term shall be two (2) years, and shall expire in May
2015.
   The appointee nominated by the Controller shall succeed the elected member
whose term expires at 12:00 noon on May 15, 2013. In the event the elected
member whose term expires on May 15, 2013, leaves the Board prior to that date,
the Controller shall nominated a successor to fill the unexpired term according
to the procedures set forth above.
   A vacancy on the Board appointed by the Mayor shall be filled by the Mayor.
A vacancy on the Board of an appointee nominated by the Controller shall be
filled for the unexpired term according to the procedures set forth above for
Controller's nominees. A vacancy in an elective office on the Board shall be
filled by a special election within 90 days after the vacancy occurs unless a
regular election is to be held within six months after such vacancy shall have
occurred.
   The Health Service Board shall:
   1.   Establish and maintain detailed historical costs for medical and
hospital care and conduct an annual review of such costs;
   2.   Apply benefits without special favor or privilege;
   3.   Put such plans as provided for in Section
A8.422 into effect and conduct and administer the same and contract therefor
and use the funds of the System;
   4.   Make rules and regulations for the administration of business of the
Health Service System, the granting of exemptions and the admission to the
System of persons who are hereby made members, and such other officers and
employees as may voluntarily become members with the approval of the Board; and
   5.   Receive, consider and, within 60 days after receipt, act upon any
matter pertaining to the policies of, or appeals from, the Health Service
System submitted to it in writing by any member or any person who has
contracted to render medical care to the members.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided, the Health Service Board shall
have the powers and duties and shall be subject to the limitations of Charter
Sections
4.102,
4.103 and
4.104.
   Subject to the requirements of state law and the budgetary and fiscal
provisions of the Charter, the Health Service Board may make provision for
heath or dental benefits for residents of the City and County of San Francisco
as provided in Section
A8.421.
(Amended November 2004; Proposition F, Approved 11/2/2010; Proposition C,
Approved 11/8/2011)
SEC. 12.201. MEDICAL DIRECTOR AND HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Health Service Board may appoint a full-time or part-time medical
director. He or she shall hold office at its pleasure. The medical director
shall be responsible to the Board as a board, but not to any individual member
or committee thereof. The Health Service Board shall appoint a full-time
administrator with experience in administering health plans or in comparable
work, who shall hold office at the Health Service Board's pleasure. The Health
Services administrator shall administer the Health Service System in accordance
with the provisions of this Charter and the rules, regulations and policies of
the Health Service Board. The Board and each committee of the Board shall
confine its activities to policy matters and to matters coming before it as an
appeals board. The Board shall prepare its rules, regulations and policies so
that they are clear, definite and complete and so that they can be readily
administered by the Health Services administrator.
(Amended November 2004)
SEC. 12.202. MEMBERSHIP IN HEALTH SERVICE SYSTEM.
   The members of the System shall consist of all officers and permanent
employees of the City and County, the Unified School District, the Community
College District, and such other officers, employees, dependents and retirees
as provided by ordinance.
SEC. 12.203. HEALTH SERVICE SYSTEM FUND.
   The Health Service System fund shall be a trust fund administered by the
Health Service Board in accordance with the provisions of this Charter solely
for the benefit of the active and retired members of the Health Service System
and their covered dependents. The City and County, School District and
Community College District shall each contribute to the Health Service System
Fund amounts sufficient to efficiently administer the Health Service System.
SEC. 12.204. RETIREE HEALTH CARE TRUST FUND.
   (a)   The Retiree Health Care Trust Fund (RHCTF) shall be an irrevocable
trust fund established under Section
A8.432, and separate from the Health Service System trust fund described in
Charter Sections
12.203 and
A8.428, to provide a funding source to defray the cost of the City's, and other
Participating Employers', obligations to pay for health coverage for retired
persons and their survivors entitled to health coverage under Section
A8.428. RHCTF assets shall be held for the sole and exclusive purpose of
providing health coverage to eligible retired persons and their survivors, and
to defray the reasonable expenses of administering the RHCTF, including but not
limited to educational, actuarial, consulting, administrative support and
accounting expenses associated with the RHCTF. Subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors by resolution, the Retiree Health Care Trust Fund Board
(Board) may, upon the adoption of a resolution, authorize specific payments for
specific amounts enumerated in the resolution shall pay for such administrative
costs from the RHCTF.
   (b)   The Board shall govern the RHCTF. The Board shall consist of the
following five trustees: the City Controller, the City Treasurer, and the
Executive Director of the San Francisco Employees' Retirement System, or their
respective designees; and two trustees elected from among active employee and
retired members of the City's Health Service System. One of the elected
trustees shall be an active employee member and one shall be a retired member
as of the date of their respective elections. Each elected trustee shall serve
for a term of five years. No person may serve simultaneously as a trustee on
the Board and as an elected or appointed member of the San Francisco Employees'
Retirement System Board or the Health Service System Board.
(Amended by Proposition B, 6/3/2008; Proposition A, 11/5/2013)
ARTICLE XIII:
ELECTIONS
SEC. 13.100. CITY AND COUNTY ELECTIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors shall adopt an Elections Code consistent with the
provisions of this Charter. Where not otherwise provided by this Charter or by
ordinance, all City and County elections shall be governed by the provisions of
applicable state laws.
SEC. 13.101. TERMS OF ELECTIVE OFFICE.
   (a)   Except in the case of an appointment or election to fill a vacancy,
the term of office of each elected officer shall commence at noon on the eighth
day of January following the date of the election.
   (b)   Subject to the applicable provisions of Section
13.102, the elected officers of the City and County, and members of the Board
of Education and of the Governing Body of the Community College District, shall
be elected as follows:
      (1)   The following officials shall be elected at the general municipal
election in 2024 and every fourth year thereafter: Mayor, Sheriff, District
Attorney, City Attorney, Treasurer, four members of the Board of Education, and
four members of the Governing Board of the Community College District.
      (2)   The following officials shall be elected at the general municipal
election in 2022 and every fourth year thereafter: Assessor-Recorder, Public
Defender, three members of the Board of Education, and three members of the
Governing Board of the Community College District.
      (3)   The election and terms of office of members of the Board of
Supervisors shall be governed by Section
13.110.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, including Section
3.101, the term of office for Mayor, City Attorney, District Attorney, Sheriff,
and Treasurer that began at noon on January 8, 2020 shall end at noon on
January 8, 2025. This five-year term for the office of Mayor shall be deemed a
single term for the purposes of term limits under Section
3.101.
(Amended November 1996; March 2002; Proposition E, Approved 11/8/2005;
Proposition D, Approved 11/6/2012; Proposition_H, Approved 11/8/2022)
SEC. 13.101.5. VACANCIES.
   (a)   If the office of Assessor-Recorder, City Attorney, District Attorney,
Public Defender, Sheriff, Treasurer, or Member of the Board of Supervisors,
Board of Education or Governing Board of the Community College District becomes
vacant because of death, resignation, recall, permanent disability, or the
inability of the respective officer to otherwise carry out the responsibilities
of the office, the Mayor shall appoint an individual qualified to fill the
vacancy under this Charter and state laws.
   (b)   If the Office of Mayor becomes vacant because of death, resignation,
recall, permanent disability or the inability to carry out the responsibilities
of the office, the President of the Board of Supervisors shall become Acting
Mayor and shall serve until a successor is appointed by the Board of
Supervisors.
   (c)   Any person filling a vacancy pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) of this
Section shall serve until a successor is selected at the next election
occurring not less than 120 days after the vacancy, at which time an election
shall be held to fill the unexpired term, provided that (1) if an election for
the vacated office is scheduled to occur less than one year after the vacancy,
the appointee shall serve until a successor is selected at that election or (2)
if an election for any seat on the same board as the vacated seat is scheduled
to occur less than one year but at least 120 days after the vacancy, the
appointee shall serve until a successor is selected at that election to fill
the unexpired term.
   (d)   If no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast at an election
to fill a vacated office, the two candidates receiving the most votes shall
qualify to have their names placed on the ballot for a municipal runoff
election at the next regular or otherwise scheduled election occurring not less
than five weeks later. If an instant runoff election process is enacted for the
offices enumerated in this Section, that process shall apply to any election
required by this Section.
(Added November 2001)
SEC. 13.102. INSTANT RUNOFF ELECTIONS.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section: (1) a candidate shall be deemed
"continuing" if the candidate has not been eliminated; (2) a ballot shall be
deemed "continuing" if it is not exhausted; and (3) a ballot shall be deemed
"exhausted," and not counted in further stages of the tabulation, if all of the
choices have been eliminated or there are no more choices indicated on the
ballot. If a ranked-choice ballot gives equal rank to two or more candidates,
the ballot shall be declared exhausted when such multiple rankings are reached.
If a voter casts a ranked-choice ballot but skips a rank, the voter's vote
shall be transferred to that voter's next ranked choice.
   (b)   The Mayor, Sheriff, District Attorney, City Attorney, Treasurer,
Assessor-Recorder, Public Defender, and members of the Board of Supervisors
shall be elected using a ranked-choice, or "instant runoff," ballot. The ballot
shall allow voters to rank a number of choices in order of preference equal to
the total number of candidates for each office; provided, however, if the
voting system, vote tabulation system or similar or related equipment used by
the City and County cannot feasibly accommodate choices equal to the total
number of candidates running for each office, then the Director of Elections
may limit the number of choices a voter may rank to no fewer than three. The
ballot shall in no way interfere with a voter's ability to cast a vote for a
write-in candidate.
   (c)   If a candidate receives a majority of the first choices, that
candidate shall be declared elected. If no candidate receives a majority, the
candidate who received the fewest first choices shall be eliminated and each
vote cast for that candidate shall be transferred to the next ranked candidate
on that voter's ballot. If, after this transfer of votes, any candidate has a
majority of the votes from the continuing ballots, that candidate shall be
declared elected.
   (d)   If no candidate receives a majority of votes from the continuing
ballots after a candidate has been eliminated and his or her votes have been
transferred to the next-ranked candidate, the continuing candidate with the
fewest votes from the continuing ballots shall be eliminated. All votes cast
for that candidate shall be transferred to the next-ranked continuing candidate
on each voter's ballot. This process of eliminating candidates and transferring
their votes to the next-ranked continuing candidates shall be repeated until a
candidate receives a majority of the votes from the continuing ballots.
   (e)   If the total number of votes of the two or more candidates credited
with the lowest number of votes is less than the number of votes credited to
the candidate with the next highest number of votes, those candidates with the
lowest number of votes shall be eliminated simultaneously and their votes
transferred to the next-ranked continuing candidate on each ballot in a single
counting operation.
   (f)   A tie between two or more candidates shall be resolved in accordance
with State law.
   (g)   The Department of Elections shall conduct a voter education campaign
to familiarize voters with the ranked-choice or, "instant runoff," method of
voting.
   (h)   Any voting system, vote tabulation system, or similar or related
equipment acquired by the City and County shall have the capability to
accommodate this system of ranked-choice, or "instant runoff," balloting.
   (i)   Ranked choice, or "instant runoff," balloting shall be used for the
general municipal election in November 2002 and all subsequent elections. If
the Director of Elections certifies to the Board of Supervisors and the Mayor
no later than July 1, 2002 that the Department will not be ready to implement
ranked-choice balloting in November 2002, then the City shall begin using
ranked-choice, or "instant runoff," balloting at the November 2003 general
municipal election.
      If ranked-choice, or "instant runoff," balloting is not used in November
of 2002, and no candidate for any elective office of the City and County,
except the Board of Education and the Governing Board of the Community College
District, receives a majority of the votes cast at an election for such office,
the two candidates receiving the most votes shall qualify to have their names
placed on the ballot for a runoff election held on the second Tuesday in
December of 2002.
(Added March 2002)
(Former Section 13.102 added November 1996; repealed March 2002)
SEC. 13.103. SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   Special municipal elections may be called in accordance with state laws.
   The date of any special municipal election shall be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors not less than 105 nor more than 120 days from the date of calling
such election; however, no special municipal election shall be held within 105
days of any general municipal or statewide election. The Board of Supervisors
may consolidate a special municipal election with a general municipal or
statewide election.
   The Board of Supervisors shall maintain a fund sufficient to pay all costs
and expenses of the City and County with respect to a special municipal
election, and such fund shall be used solely to pay the costs of such an
election. Upon payment of any such costs or expenses, an appropriation shall be
made in the next succeeding annual appropriations ordinance sufficient to
reimburse the fund.
SEC. 13.103.5. ELECTIONS COMMISSION.
   An Elections Commission shall be established to oversee all public federal,
state, district and municipal elections in the City and County. The Commission
shall set general policies for the Department of Elections and shall be
responsible for the proper administration of the general practices of the
Department, subject to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of this Charter.
These duties shall include but not be limited to approving written plans prior
to each election, submitted by the Director of Elections, detailing the
policies, procedures, and personnel that will be used to conduct the election
as well as an assessment of how well the plan succeeded in carrying out a free,
fair and functional election.
   The Commission shall consist of seven members who shall serve five-year
terms. No person appointed as a Commission member may serve as such for more
than two successive five-year terms. Any person appointed as a Commission
member to complete more than two and one-half years of a five-year term shall
be deemed, for the purpose of this section, to have served one full term. No
person having served two successive five-year terms may serve as a Commission
member until at least five years after the expiration of the second successive
term in office. Any Commission member who resigns with less than two and one-
half years remaining until the expiration of the term shall be deemed, for the
purposes of this section, to have served a full five-year term.
   The Mayor, the Board of Supervisors, the City Attorney, the Public Defender,
the District Attorney, the Treasurer, and the Board of Education of the San
Francisco Unified School District each shall appoint one member of the
Commission. The member appointed by the Mayor shall have a background in the
electoral process. The member appointed by the City Attorney shall have a
background in elections law. The member appointed by the Treasurer shall have a
background in financial management. The members appointed by the District
Attorney, Public Defender, the Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified
School District, and the Board of Supervisors shall be broadly representative
of the general public. In the event a vacancy occurs, the appointing authority
who appointed the member vacating the office shall appoint a qualified person
to complete the remainder of the term. All members initially appointed to the
Election Commission shall take office on the first day of January, 2002.
   The initial terms of Commission members shall expire according to the
following guidelines: the term of the members appointed by the Mayor and the
Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District shall expire on
January 1, 2003; the term of the members appointed by the Board of Supervisors
and the Treasurer shall expire on January 1 2004; the term of the member
appointed by the City Attorney shall expire January 1, 2005; the term of the
member appointed by the Public Defender shall expire January 1, 2006; and the
term of the member appointed by the District Attorney shall expire January 1,
2007.
   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Members of the
Commission shall be officers of the City and County, and may be removed by the
appointing authority only pursuant to Section
15.105. During his or her tenure, members and employees of the Elections
Commission are subject to the following restrictions:
   (a)   Restrictions on Holding Office. No member or employee of the Elections
Commission may hold any other City or County office or be an officer of a
political party.
   (b)   Restrictions on Employment. No member or employee of the Elections
Commission may be a registered campaign consultant or registered lobbyist, or
be employed by or receive gifts or other compensation from a registered
campaign consultant or registered lobbyist. No member of the Elections
Commission may hold any employment with the City and County and no employee of
the Elections Commission may hold any other employment with the City and
County.
   (c)   Restrictions on Political Activities. No member or employee of the
Elections Commission may participate in any campaign supporting or opposing a
candidate or ballot measure that will appear on the San Francisco ballot, other
than candidates seeking election to federal or statewide office. For purposes
of this section, participation in a campaign includes but is not limited to
making contributions or soliciting contributions to any committee, including
general purpose committees; publicly endorsing or urging endorsement of any
candidate or ballot measure; or participating in decisions by organizations to
participate in a campaign.
   If a person appointed to the Elections Commission is, at the time of
appointment, an officer or employee, as prohibited by this section, that person
shall be eligible to serve on the Elections Commission only if he or she
resigns from his or her office or employment within thirty days of appointment.
(Added November 2001; amended November 2002)
SEC. 13.104. DEPARTMENT OF ELECTIONS.
   A Department of Elections shall be established to conduct all public
federal, state, district and municipal elections in the City and County. The
department shall be administered by the Director of Elections, who shall be
vested with the day-to-day conduct and management of the Department and of
voter registration and matters pertaining to elections in the City and County.
The Director shall report to the Elections Commission.
   For purposes of this section, the conduct of elections shall include, but
not be limited to: voter registration; the nomination and filing process for
candidates to City and County offices; the preparation and distribution of
voter information materials; ballots, precinct operations and vote count; the
prevention of fraud in such elections; and the recount of ballots in cases of
challenge or fraud.
   The Director shall be appointed by the Elections Commission from a list of
qualified applicants provided pursuant to the civil service provisions of this
Charter. The Director shall serve a five-year term, during which he or she may
be removed by the Elections Commission for cause, upon written charges and
following a hearing. The Elections Commission shall present the written charges
to the Director no less than thirty days before the hearing. If the Elections
Commission votes to remove the Director, he or she shall have the right to
appeal to the Civil Service Commission. On appeal, the Civil Service Commission
shall be limited to consideration of the record before the Elections
Commission; however, the Civil Service Commission may independently evaluate
and weigh evidence and may in its discretion consider evidence proffered to the
Elections Commission that the Commission excluded and may in its discretion
exclude evidence that the Elections Commission considered. The term of the
Director shall expire five years after his or her appointment. No less than
thirty days before the expiration of the Director's term, the Elections
Commission shall appoint a Director for the next term, who may but need not be
the incumbent Director. Subject to the civil service provisions of this
Charter, the Director shall have the power to appoint and remove other
employees of the Department of Elections.
   In addition to any other conflict of interest provisions applicable to City
employees, the Director of Elections and all other employees of the Department
of Elections shall be subject to the conflict-of-interest provisions in Section
13.103.5. The Elections Commission, may upon the recommendation of the Director
of Elections and a finding that the Department will not have adequate staffing
to conduct an election, request from the Board of Supervisors a waiver of the
conflict-of-interest provisions in Section
13.103.5 for employees working no more than thirty days in a single calendar
year. The Board of Supervisors shall approve or deny such requests from the
Elections Commission by motion.
(Amended November 2001)
SEC. 13.104.5. USE OF OTHER CITY EMPLOYEES AND OFFICERS.
   Except as provided below, no City employee or officer, other than the
Director of Elections, an appointee of the Director of Elections or a member of
the Elections Commission, may in any capacity perform any function relating to
the conduct of an election that this Charter places under the Department of
Elections. This section prohibits City personnel from providing to the
Department of Elections services that are unique to that department. This
section does not prohibit City personnel from providing to the Department of
Elections ordinary services that are unrelated to the conduct of an election
and that are indistinguishable from services performed for other City
departments. These general support services include, but are not limited to,
services relating to human resources, personnel processing, payroll, workers
compensation, budgeting, accounting, procurement, contracting, and the
maintenance of telephone and voice mail systems. The Elections Commission may,
upon the recommendation of the Director of Elections request from the Board of
Supervisors a waiver of this prohibition so as to allow City employees and
officers to assist the Department of Elections. The Board of Supervisors shall
approve or deny such requests from the Elections Commission by motion.
   The City Attorney shall serve as legal counsel to the Elections Commission
and the Department of Elections. The Commission may, by a majority vote of its
members. hire outside legal counsel to advise the Commission and the Department
on matters that directly involve the election or campaign of the City Attorney,
if the City Attorney is standing for election. All outside legal counsel hired
pursuant to this Section shall be a member in good standing of the California
State Bar. In selecting outside legal counsel, the Commission shall give
preference to engaging the services of a City attorney's office, a County
counsel's office or other public entity law office with an expertise regarding
the subject-matter jurisdiction of the Elections Commission. In the event that
the Commission concludes that private counsel is necessary, it may, by a
majority vote, engage the services of a private attorney who has at least five
years' experience in the subject-matter jurisdiction of the Elections
Commission. Any private counsel retained pursuant to this Section shall be
subject to the conflict of interest provisions of Section
13.103.5. Any contract for outside legal counsel authorized by this section
shall be paid for by the Commission and shall be subject to the budgetary and
fiscal provisions of this charter.
   The Sheriff shall be responsible for transporting all voted ballots and all
other documents or devices used to record votes from the polls to the central
counting location and approving a security plan for the ballots until the
certification of election results. This requirement shall not become operative
following its adoption until the Sheriff has completed meeting and conferring
required by state law. The Elections Commission shall send a copy of the
approved transportation and security plan to the Board of Supervisors.
   The Director of Elections shall develop and submit for the approval of the
Elections Commission an alternative transportation and security plan if an
incumbent sheriff is running for election or if there is a measure on the San
Francisco ballot that would have a material, financial effect on the Sheriff or
the uniformed personnel of the Sheriff's department as determined by the Ethics
Commission. The Director of Elections shall invite the Secretary of State to
comment on any alternative transportation and security plan. The Elections
Commission shall send a copy of the approved alternative transportation and
security plan to the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall have
the authority to enter into any contracts or take whatever actions are
necessary to meet the alternative security requirements of this section.
(Added November 2001; amended November 2002)
SEC. 13.105. NOMINATION.
   The City and County shall follow the nomination provisions for municipal
elective offices in accordance with state laws, except as provided for by
ordinance or this Charter.
SEC. 13.106. QUALIFICATION.
   Each candidate for an elective office of the City and County shall be a
resident of the City and County and an elector at the time that nomination
papers are issued to the candidate, and each elected officer shall continue to
be an elector during the term of the office.
SEC. 13.107. ELECTION MATERIAL MAILED TO VOTERS.
   The Board of Supervisors shall, by ordinance, provide for the format of a
voters' pamphlet including a sample ballot, candidates' statements, lists of
sponsors, arguments for and against each ballot measure, any financial impact
statements prepared by the Controller, and arguments for and against the recall
of any officers. The voters' pamphlet shall be mailed to each elector so as to
be received at least ten days prior to each general, runoff or special
municipal election.
SEC. 13.107.5. POSTING OF BALLOT COUNTS AT POLLS.
   After the closing of the polls, each precinct board shall cause to be posted
outside of each polling place an accounting that includes the number of ballots
delivered to that precinct board and the number of voted ballots, unused
ballots, spoiled ballots, cancelled ballots, absentee ballots and provisional
ballots returned to the Department of Elections by the precinct board at any
time on election day. After the closing of the polls, each precinct board shall
also post outside each polling place any computer record indicating the number
of ballots cast for each candidate and for or against each ballot measure.
(Added November 2001)
SEC. 13.108. DETERMINATION OF ELECTION RESULTS.
   The canvass of votes cast, and certification of elections shall be as
prescribed by law. If a person elected fails to qualify or for any reason does
not take office, the office shall be filled in the manner prescribed by state
law for the filling of a vacancy in such office.
SEC. 13.109. FILING FEES.
   The amount of fees to be charged for candidate filings, candidate
statements, paid arguments and any other fees to be collected in the conduct of
elections shall be proposed by the Director of Elections for approval by the
Board of Supervisors on or before the second Monday in December immediately
prior to the election in which the fees apply.
   Signatures of registered voters in the City and County may be submitted in
lieu of any filing fee. At the same time the Board of Supervisors approves the
schedule of fees for the election, the Director of Elections, with the approval
of the Board of Supervisors, shall establish the dollar value equivalent of
each valid signature submitted.
SEC. 13.110. ELECTION OF SUPERVISORS.
   (a)   The members of the board of supervisors shall be elected by district
as set forth in this section.
   (b)   The City and County shall be divided into 11 supervisorial districts
as set forth in this section. Beginning with the general municipal election in
2000, and until new districts are established pursuant to this section, these
districts shall be used for the election or recall of the members of the board
of supervisors, and for filling any vacancy in the office of member of the
board of supervisors by appointment. Once new districts are established, those
districts shall be used for the same purposes. No change in the boundary or
location of any district shall operate to abolish or terminate the term of
office of any member of the board of supervisors prior to the expiration of the
term of office for which such member was elected or appointed.
   (c)   [See editor's note following the concluding paragraph (f) of this section.]
   (d)   Within 60 days following publication of the decennial federal census
in the year 2000 and every decennial federal census after that, the Director of
Elections shall report to the Board of Supervisors on whether the existing
districts continue to meet the requirements of federal and state law and the
criteria for drawing districts lines set in the Charter.
      The criteria for drawing districts lines are:
      Districts must conform to all legal requirements, including the
requirement that they be equal in population. Population variations between
districts should be limited to 1 percent from the statistical mean unless
additional variations, limited to 5 percent of the statistical mean, are
necessary to prevent dividing or diluting the voting power of minorities and/or
to keep recognized neighborhoods intact; provided, however, that the
redistricting provided for herein shall conform to the rule of one person, one
vote, and shall reflect communities of interest within the City and County.
Census data, at the census block level, as released by the United States Census
Bureau, statistically adjusted by the Bureau to correct the unadjusted census
counts for any measured undercount or overcount of any subset of the population
according to the bureau's Accuracy and Coverage Evaluation or other sampling
method, shall be used in any analysis of population requirements and
application of the rule of one person one vote. In the event such adjusted
census data, at the census block level, are not released by the Bureau,
population data, at the census block level, adjusted by the California
Department of Finance for any measured undercount or overcount maybe used.
      If it is determined that the districts are in compliance with all legal
requirements, including the requirement that they be equal in population, the
current districts as drawn will be valid for the next decade. If it is
determined that any of the districts are not in compliance, the Board of
Supervisors by ordinance shall convene and fund a nine-member elections task
force. Three members shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors, three
members shall be appointed by the Mayor, and three members shall be appointed
by the Director of Elections unless an Elections Commission is created in which
case the appointments designated to the Director of Elections shall be made by
the Elections Commission. Task Force shall be appointed by January 8, 2002 and
following the publication of each decennial federal census thereafter, shall be
appointed within sixty days after issuance of a report by the Director of
Elections to the Board of Supervisors that the districts are not in compliance,
pursuant to this subsection. 
      Members of the Task Force previously appointed by the Director of
Elections shall serve on the Task Force until the Elections Commission, if
established, appoints three members to the Task Force, whereupon the terms of
the members appointed by the Director of Elections shall expire.
      The Director of Elections shall serve ex officio as a non-voting member.
The task force shall be responsible for redrawing the district lines in
accordance with the law and the criteria established in this Section, and shall
make such adjustments as appropriate based on public input at public hearings.
      The Task Force shall complete redrawing district lines before the
fifteenth day of April of the year in which the first election using the
redrawn lines will be conducted. The Board of Supervisors may not revise the
district boundaries established by the Task Force.
      If the Task Force determines that the adjusted population data to which
this subsection refers are not available a sufficient period of time before the
fifteenth day of April in order to use the adjusted population data in
redrawing the district lines for the following supervisorial election, and the
adjusted population data demonstrate more than a five percent variance from the
figures used in redrawing the district lines for the [sic] that supervisorial
election, the Task Force shall by the fifteenth day of April immediately
preceding the next supervisorial election redraw the district lines for that
supervisorial election in accordance with the provisions of this section. The
procedures for redrawing supervisorial lines following the publication of every
subsequent decennial federal census shall follow the procedures established by
this Section.
      The City Attorney shall remove the description of district lines found in
this subsection from the Charter after the Elections Task Force has completed
redrawing the district lines as set forth above. Following each redrawing of
the district lines thereafter, the City Attorney shall cause the redrawn
district lines to be published in an appendix to this Charter.
   (e)   Each member of the board of supervisors, commencing with the general
municipal election in November, 2000, shall be elected by the electors within a
supervisorial district, and must have resided in the district in which he or
she is elected for a period of not less than 30 days immediately preceding the
date he or she files a declaration of candidacy for the office of supervisor,
and must continue to reside therein during his or her incumbency, and upon
ceasing to be such resident shall be removed from office.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any provisions of this section or any other section of
the charter to the contrary, the respective terms of office of the members of
the board of supervisors who shall hold office on the eighth day of January,
2001, shall expire at 12 o'clock noon on said date and the 11 persons elected
as members of the board of supervisors at the general election in 2000 shall
succeed to said offices on said eighth day of January, 2001. At that time, the
clerk of the board of supervisors shall determine by lot whether the
supervisors elected from the even- or odd-numbered supervisorial districts at
the general municipal election in 2000 shall have terms of office expiring at
noon on the eighth day of January, 2003, and which shall have terms of office
expiring at noon on the eighth day of January, 2005; commencing, however, with
the general municipal election in November, 2002, the terms of office of the
supervisors elected from the even- or odd-numbered supervisorial districts, as
the case may be, shall be for a term of four years and shall continue as such
thereafter. Those members of the board of supervisors elected at the general
election in 1998, and those elected at the general election in 2000 who only
serve an initial two-year term, shall not be deemed to have served a full term
for purposes of the term limit established in Section
2.101.
(Added November 1996; amended November 1999; November 2001)
SEC. 13.111. ELECTION OF BOARD OF EDUCATION.
   (a)   Manner of Election.
      (1)   Beginning on January 1, 2017, and ending on the sunset date set
forth in subsection (a)(2), elections for the Board of Education of the Unified
School District shall be conducted in a manner that permits any San Francisco
resident to vote who either:
         (A)   is a voter, as defined in
Article XVII of this Charter, or
         (B)   is the parent, legal guardian, or caregiver (as defined in
California Family Code Section 6550 or any successor legislation) of a child
under age 19 residing in the San Francisco Unified School District, is the
minimum age required under this Charter to vote in a municipal election, and is
not disqualified from voting under Article II Section 4 of the California
Constitution or any implementing State statute, regardless of whether the
person is a United States citizen.
         The Board of Supervisors may adopt ordinances implementing this
subsection (a)(1).
      (2)   Subsection (a)(1)(B) authorizing non-citizens to vote in Board of
Education elections shall expire by operation of law on December 31, 2022, or
on December 31 immediately following the third election for members of the
Board of Education conducted in accordance with this Section
13.111, whichever is later. Thereafter, the Board of Supervisors may determine
by ordinance whether non-citizens may vote in elections for members of the
Board of Education.*
   (b)   Limitations. This Section
13.111  shall apply only to elections for members of the Board of Education of
the San Francisco Unified School District. Nothing in this Section
13.111  shall affect the terms of office of members of the Board of Education,
including incumbent members on the effective date of the Charter amendment
enacting this Section. Nothing in this Section shall alter the definition of
“elector” or “voter” set forth in
Article XVII of this Charter.
(Added by Proposition N, Approved 11/8/2016)
ARTICLE XIV:
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
SEC. 14.100. GENERAL.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the voters of the City and
County shall have the power to enact initiatives and the power to nullify acts
or measures involving legislative matters by referendum.
SEC. 14.101. INITIATIVES.
   An initiative may be proposed by presenting to the Director of Elections a
petition containing the initiative and signed by voters in a number equal to at
least two percent of the number of registered voters in the City and County.
Such initiative shall be submitted to the voters by the Director of Elections
upon certification of the sufficiency of the petition’s signatures.
   A vote on such initiative shall occur at the next general municipal or
statewide election occurring at any time after 90 days from the date of the
certificate of sufficiency executed by the Director of Elections, unless the
Board of Supervisors directs that the initiative be voted upon at a special
municipal election.
   If the petition containing the initiative is signed by voters in a number
equal to at least ten percent of the votes cast for all candidates for Mayor in
the last preceding general municipal election for Mayor, and contains a request
that the initiative be submitted forthwith to voters at a special municipal
election, the Director of Elections shall promptly call such a special
municipal election on the initiative. Such election shall be held not less than
105 nor more than 120 days from the date of its calling unless it is within 105
days of a general municipal or statewide election, in which event the
initiative shall be submitted at such general municipal or statewide election.
   No initiative or declaration of policy approved by the voters shall be
subject to veto, or to amendment or repeal except by the voters, unless such
initiative or declaration of policy shall otherwise provide.
(Amended by Proposition_H, Approved 11/8/2022)
SEC. 14.102. LEGISLATIVE REFERENDUM.
   Prior to the effective date of an ordinance, a referendum on that ordinance
may be proposed by filing with the Board of Supervisors a petition protesting
the passage of that ordinance. Such petition shall be signed by voters in a
number equal to at least ten percent, or in the case of an ordinance granting
any franchise, at least five percent, of the votes cast for all candidates for
Mayor in the last preceding general municipal election for Mayor.
   Such ordinance shall then be suspended from becoming effective. The Board of
Supervisors shall reconsider the ordinance. If it is not entirely repealed, the
Board of Supervisors shall submit the ordinance to the voters at the next
general municipal or statewide election or at a special municipal election.
Such ordinance shall not become effective until approved by voters at such an
election.
SEC. 14.103. RECALL.
   (a)   An elected official of the City and County, the City Administrator,
the Controller, or any member of the Airports Commission the Board of
Education, the governing board of the Community College District, the Ethics
Commission or the Public Utilities Commission may be recalled by the voters as
provided by this Charter and by the laws of the State of California, except
that no recall petitions shall be initiated with respect to any officer who has
held office for less than six months.
   (b)   Upon certifying the sufficiency of the recall petition's signatures,
the Director of Elections shall immediately call a special municipal election
on the recall, to be held not less than 105 nor more than 120 days from the
date of its calling unless it is within 105 days of a general municipal or
statewide election, in which event the recall shall be submitted at such
general municipal or statewide election.
(Amended November 1996; Amended by Proposition E, 11/4/2008)
SEC. 14.104. PETITIONS – WITHDRAWAL OF SIGNATURES.
   A person signing a petition for initiative, referendum or recall may
withdraw his or her name from such petition by filing with the Director of
Elections a verified revocation of that signature prior to the filing of such
petition itself.
ARTICLE XV:
ETHICS 
SEC. 15.100. ETHICS COMMISSION.
   The Ethics Commission shall consist of five members who shall serve six-year
terms; provided that the first five commissioners to be appointed to take
office on the first day of February, 2002 shall by lot classify their terms so
that the term of one commissioner shall expire at 12:00 o'clock noon on each of
the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth anniversaries of such date,
respectively; and, on the expiration of these and successive terms of office,
the appointments shall be made for six-year terms.
   The Mayor, the Board of Supervisors, the City Attorney, the District
Attorney and the Assessor each shall appoint one member of the Commission. The
member appointed by the Mayor shall have a background in public information and
public meetings. The member appointed by the City Attorney shall have a
background in law as it relates to government ethics. The member appointed by
the Assessor shall have a background in campaign finance. The members appointed
by the District Attorney and Board of Supervisors shall be broadly
representative of the general public.
   In the event a vacancy occurs, the officer who appointed the member vacating
the office shall appoint a qualified person to complete the remainder of the
term. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. Members of
the Commission shall be officers of the City and County, and may be removed by
the appointing authority only pursuant to Section
15.105.
   No person may serve more than one six-year term as a member of the
Commission, provided that persons appointed to fill a vacancy for an unexpired
term with less than three years remaining or appointed to an initial term of
three or fewer years shall be eligible to be appointed to one additional six-
year term. Any term served before the effective date of this Section shall not
count toward a member's term limit. Any person who completes a term as a
Commissioner shall be eligible for reappointment six years after the expiration
of his or her term. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Section or any other
section of the Charter to the contrary, the respective terms of office of the
members of the Commission who shall hold office on the first day of February,
2002, shall expire at 12 o'clock noon on said date, and the five persons
appointed as members of the Commission as provided in this Section shall
succeed to said offices on said first day of February, 2002, at 12 o'clock
noon; provided that if any appointing authority has not made a new appointment
by such date, the sitting member shall continue to serve until replaced the new
appointee.
   During his or her tenure, members and employees of the Ethics Commission are
subject to the following restrictions:
   (a)   Restrictions on Holding Office. No member or employee of the Ethics
Commission may hold any other City or County office or be an officer of a
political party.
   (b)   Restrictions on Employment. No member or employee of the Ethics
Commission may be a registered lobbyist or campaign consultant, or be employed
by or receive gifts or other compensation from a registered lobbyist or
campaign consultant. No member of the Ethics Commission may hold employment
with the City and County and no employee of the Commission may hold any other
employment with the City and County.
   (c)   Restrictions on Political Activities. No member or employee of the
Ethics Commission may participate in any campaign supporting or opposing a
candidate for City elective office, a City ballot measure, or a City officer
running for any elective office. For the purposes of this section,
participation in a campaign includes but is not limited to making contributions
or soliciting contributions to any committee within the Ethics Commission's
jurisdiction, publicly endorsing or urging endorsement of a candidate or ballot
measure, or participating in decisions by organizations to participate in a
campaign.
   The Commission may subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance and
testimony, administer oaths and affirmations, take evidence and require by
subpoena the production of any books, papers, records or other items material
to the performance of the Commission's duties or exercise of its powers.
(Amended November 2001; November 2002; November 2003)
SEC. 15.101. EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND COMMISSION STAFF.
   The Commission shall appoint and may remove an Executive Director. The
Executive Director shall have a background in campaign finance, public
information and public meetings and the law as it relates to governmental
ethics. The Executive Director shall be the chief executive of the department
and shall have all the powers provided for department heads. Subject to the
civil service provisions of this Charter, the Executive Director shall have the
power to appoint and remove other employees of the Commission. In addition to
any other conflict of interest provisions applicable to City employees, the
Executive Director and all other employees of the Commission shall be subject
to the conflict of interest provisions in Section
15.100, except that the post-employment restrictions contained therein shall
apply only to the Executive Director and management-level employees.
(Amended November 2001)
SEC. 15.102. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Commission may adopt, amend and rescind rules and regulations consistent
with and related to carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Charter
and ordinances related to campaign finances, conflicts of interest, lobbying,
campaign consultants and governmental ethics and to govern procedures of the
Commission. In addition, the Commission may adopt rules and regulations
relating to carrying out the purposes and provisions of ordinances regarding
open meetings and public records. The Commission shall transmit to the Board of
Supervisors rules and regulations adopted by the Commission within 24 hours of
their adoption. A rule or regulation adopted by the Commission shall become
effective 60 days after the date of its adoption unless before the expiration
of this 60- day period two-thirds of all members of the Board of Supervisors
vote to veto the rule or regulation.
   The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of the Commission.
   Any ordinance which the Supervisors are empowered to pass relating to
conflicts of interest, campaign finance, lobbying, campaign consultants or
governmental ethics may be submitted to the electors at the next succeeding
general election by the Ethics Commission by a four-fifths vote of all its
members.
(Amended November 2001)
SEC. 15.103. CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Public office is a public trust and all officers and employees of the City
and County shall exercise their public duties in a manner consistent with this
trust. The City may adopt conflict of interest and governmental ethics laws to
implement this provision and to prescribe penalties in addition to discipline
and removal authorized in this Charter. All officers and employees of the City
and County shall be subject to such conflict of interest and governmental
ethics laws and the penalties prescribed by such laws.
(Amended November 2003)
SEC. 15.105. SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL.
   (a)   ELECTIVE AND CERTAIN APPOINTED OFFICERS. Any elective officer, and any
member of the Airport Commission, Asian Art Commission, Civil Service
Commission, Commission on the Status of Women, Golden Gate Concourse Authority
Board of Directors, Health Commission, Human Services Commission, Juvenile
Probation Commission, Municipal Transportation Agency Board of Directors, Port
Commission, Public Utilities Commission, Recreation and Park Commission, Fine
Arts Museums Board of Trustees, War Memorial and Performing Art Center Board of
Trustees, Board of Education or Community College Board is subject to
suspension and removal for official misconduct as provided in this section.
Such officer may be suspended by the Mayor and the Mayor shall appoint a
qualified person to discharge the duties of the office during the period of
suspension. Upon such suspension, the Mayor shall immediately notify the Ethics
Commission and Board of Supervisors thereof in writing and the cause thereof,
and shall present written charges against such suspended officer to the Ethics
Commission and Board of Supervisors at or prior to their next regular meetings
following such suspension, and shall immediately furnish a copy of the same to
such officer, who shall have the right to appear with counsel before the Ethics
Commission in his or her defense. The Ethics Commission shall hold a hearing
not less than five days after the filing of written charges. After the hearing,
the Ethics Commission shall transmit the full record of the hearing to the
Board of Supervisors with a recommendation as to whether the charges should be
sustained. If, after reviewing the complete record, the charges are sustained
by not less than a three-fourths vote of all members of the Board of
Supervisors, the suspended officer shall be removed from office; if not so
sustained, or if not acted on by the Board of Supervisors within 30 days after
the receipt of the record from the Ethics Commission, the suspended officer
shall thereby be reinstated.
   (b)   BUILDING INSPECTION COMMISSION, PLANNING COMMISSION, BOARD OF APPEALS,
ELECTIONS COMMISSION, ETHICS COMMISSION, SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT OVERSIGHT BOARD,
AND ENTERTAINMENT COMMISSION. Members of the Building Inspection Commission,
the Planning Commission, the Board of Appeals, the Elections Commission, the
Ethics Commission, the Sheriff’s Department Oversight Board, and the
Entertainment Commission may be suspended and removed pursuant to the
provisions of subsection (a) of this section except that the Mayor may initiate
removal only of the Mayor’s appointees and the appointing authority shall act
in place of the Mayor for all other appointees.
   (c)   REMOVAL FOR CONVICTION OF A FELONY CRIME INVOLVING MORAL TURPITUDE.
      (1)   Officers Enumerated in Subsections (a) and (b).
         (A)   An appointing authority must immediately remove from office any
official enumerated in subsections (a) or (b) upon:
            (i)   a court's final conviction of that official of a felony crime
involving moral turpitude; and
            (ii)   a determination made by the Ethics Commission, after a
hearing, that the crime for which the official was convicted warrants removal.
         (B)   For the purposes of this subsection, the Mayor shall act as the
appointing authority for any elective official.
         (C)   Removal under this subsection is not subject to the procedures
in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
      (2)   Other Officers and Employees.
         (A)   At will appointees. Officers and employees who hold their
positions at the pleasure of their appointing authority must be removed upon:
            (i)   a final conviction of a felony crime involving moral
turpitude; and
            (ii)   a determination made by the Ethics Commission, after a
hearing, that the crime for which the appointee was convicted warrants removal.
         (B)   For cause appointees. Officers and employees who by law may be
removed only for cause must be removed upon:
            (i)   a final conviction of a felony crime involving moral
turpitude; and
            (ii)   a determination made by the Ethics Commission, after a
hearing, that the crime for which the appointee was convicted warrants removal.
      (3)   Penalty for Failure to Remove. Failure to remove an appointee as
required under this subsection shall be official misconduct.
   (d)   DISQUALIFICATION.
      (1)   (A)   Any person who has been removed from any federal, state,
County or City office or employment upon a final conviction of a felony crime
involving moral turpitude shall be ineligible for election or appointment to
City office or employment for a period of ten years after removal.
         (B)   Any person removed from any federal, state, County or City
office or employment for official misconduct shall be ineligible for election
or appointment to City office or employment for a period of five years after
removal.
      (2)   (A)    Any City department head, board, commission or other
appointing authority that removes a City officer or employee from office or
employment on the grounds of official misconduct must invoke the
disqualification provision in subsection (d)(1)(B) and provide notice of such
disqualification in writing to the City officer or employee.
         (B)   Upon the request of any former City officer or employee, the
Ethics Commission may, after a public hearing, overturn the application of the
disqualification provision of subsection (d)(1)(B) if: (i) the decision that
the former officer or employee engaged in official misconduct was not made
after a hearing by a court, the Board of Supervisors, the Ethics Commission, an
administrative body, an administrative hearing officer, or a labor arbitrator;
and (ii) if the officer or employee does not have the right to appeal his or
her restriction on holding future office or employment to the San Francisco
Civil Service Commission.
   (e)   OFFICIAL MISCONDUCT. Official misconduct means any wrongful behavior
by a public officer in relation to the duties of his or her office, willful in
its character, including any failure, refusal or neglect of an officer to
perform any duty enjoined on him or her by law, or conduct that falls below the
standard of decency, good faith and right action impliedly required of all
public officers and including any violation of a specific conflict of interest
or governmental ethics law. When any City law provides that a violation of the
law constitutes or is deemed official misconduct, the conduct is covered by
this definition and may subject the person to discipline and/or removal from
office.
(Amended November 2001; March 2002; November 2003; Proposition_D, Approved 11/
3/2020)
SEC. 15.107. REPORTING OF CAMPAIGN FINANCING.
   The Board of Supervisors shall, by ordinance, prescribe requirements for
campaign contributions and expenditures and any limitations thereon with
respect to candidates for elective office and ballot measures in the City and
County.
ARTICLE XVI:
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 16.101. ACQUISITION OF PUBLIC UTILITIES.
   It is the declared purpose and intention of the people of the City and
County, when public interest and necessity demand, that public utilities shall
be gradually acquired and ultimately owned by the City and County. Whenever the
Board of Supervisors, as provided in Sections
9.106,
9.107 and
9.108 of this Charter, shall determine that the public interest or necessity
demands the acquisition, construction or completion of any public utility or
utilities by the City and County, or whenever the electors shall petition the
Board of Supervisors, as provided in Sections
9.110 and
14.101 of this Charter, for the acquisition of any public utility or utilities,
the Supervisors must procure a report from the Public Utilities Commission
thereon.
SEC. 16.103. UTILITY REVENUES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (a)   Receipts from each utility operated by the Public Utilities Commission
shall be paid into the City and County treasury and maintained in a separate
fund for each such utility. Appropriations from such funds shall be made for
the following purposes for each such utility in the order named:
      1.   For the payment of operating expenses, pension charges and
proportionate payments to such compensation and other insurance and accident
reserve funds as the Commission may establish or the Board of Supervisors may
require;
      2.   For repairs and maintenance;
      3.   For reconstruction and replacements as hereinafter described;
      4.   For the payment of interest and sinking funds on the bonds issued by
the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to this charter;
      5.   For extensions and improvements; and
      6.   For a surplus fund.
      For any utility with outstanding bonds for which the indenture requires
different payment priorities, the bond priorities will control over the
priorities set forth in this section.
   (b)   For the purpose of providing funds for reconstruction and replacements
due to physical and functional depreciation of each of the utilities under the
jurisdiction of the Commission, the Commission must create and maintain a
reconstruction and replacement fund for each such utility, sufficient for the
purposes mentioned in this section, and in accordance with an established
practice for utilities of similar character, which shall be the basis for the
amount necessary to be appropriated annually to provide for said reconstruction
and replacements.
   (c)   If, at the end of any fiscal year, the Controller certifies that
excess surplus funds of a utility exist, from hydropower assets or water or
clean water assets in excess of 25 percent of the total expenditures of such
utility in the previous fiscal year for costs of operation, repair, maintenance
and debt service coverage and required debt service reserves, the Public
Utilities Commission may transfer that surplus revenue, in whole or in part, to
any other utility system under the Commission's jurisdiction on the operative
date of this section.
   (d)   Any surplus revenue which the Public Utilities Commission unanimously
finds is not required for utility purposes pursuant to sections (a) and (b) of
this section may be transferred to the General Fund by the Public Utilities
Commission with the concurrence of three-fourths of the Board of Supervisors
upon making all of the following findings of fact and judgment:
      (a)   That a surplus exists or is projected to exist after meeting the
requirements of this section;
      (b)   That there is no unfunded operating or capital program or required
reserve that by its lack of funding could jeopardize bond ratings, health,
safety, water supply or power production;
      (c)   That there is no reasonably foreseeable operating contingency that
cannot be funded without General Fund subsidy; and
      (d)   That such a transfer of funds in all other respects reflects
prudent utility practice.
      The Commission shall make such findings having received reports and an
affirmative recommendation from the General Manager and a public hearing, which
shall have received no less than 30 days of public notice.
   (e)   The provisions of subsection (c) above shall not be applied in a
manner that would be inconsistent with the provisions of any outstanding or
future indentures, resolutions, contracts or other agreements of the City and
County relating to bonded indebtedness issued in connection with the utility,
or with any applicable state or federal laws.
(Amended November 2002)
SEC. 16.104. AIRPORT REVENUE FUND.
   Subject to the budget and fiscal provisions of this Charter:
   (a)   The entire gross revenue of the Airport Commission shall be set aside
and deposited into a fund in the City and County treasury to be known as the
"Airport Revenue Fund." All amounts paid into the Fund shall be maintained by
the Treasurer separate and apart from all other City and County funds and shall
be secured by the Treasurer's official bond or bonds.
   Separate accounts shall be kept with respect to receipts and disbursements
of each airport under the jurisdiction of the Commission.
   (b)   Monies in the Airport Revenue Fund including earnings thereon shall be
appropriated, transferred, expended or used for the following purposes
pertaining to the financing, maintenance and operation of airports and related
facilities owned, operated or controlled by the Commission and only in
accordance with the following priority:
      1.   The payment of operation and maintenance expenses for such airports
or related facilities;
      2.   The payment of pension charges and proportionate payments to such
compensation and other insurance or outside reserve funds as the Commission may
establish or the Board of Supervisors may require with respect to employees of
the Commission;
      3.   The payment of principal, interest, reserve, sinking fund and other
mandatory funds created to secure revenue bonds hereafter issued by the
Commission for the acquisition, construction or extension of airports or
related facilities owned, operated or controlled by the Commission;
      4.   The payment of principal and interest on general obligation bonds
heretofore or hereafter issued by the City and County for airport purposes;
      5.   Reconstruction and replacement as determined by the Commission or as
required by any airport revenue bond ordinance duly adopted and approved;
      6.   The acquisition of land, real property or interest in real property
for, and the acquisition, construction, enlargement and improvement of new and
existing buildings, structures, facilities, utilities, equipment, appliances
and other property necessary or convenient for the development or improvement
of any airports and heliports owned, controlled or operated by the Commission
in the promotion and accommodation of air commerce or navigation and matters
incidental thereto;
      7.   The return and repayment into the General Fund of the City and
County of any sums paid by the City and County from funds raised by taxation
for the payment of interest on and principal of any general obligation bonds
previously issued by the City and County for the acquisition, construction and
improvement of the San Francisco International Airport;
      8.   For any other lawful purpose of the Commission including, but not
limited to, transfer to the General Fund during each fiscal year of 25 percent,
or such lesser percentage as the Board of Supervisors shall establish, of the
non-airline revenues as a return upon the City and County's investment in the
Airport. "Non-airline" revenues means all airport revenues from whatever source
less revenues from airline rentals and charges to airlines for use of Airport
facilities.
SEC. 16.105. CALIFORNIA ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.
   All buildings and improvements erected by or under the authority of the
California Academy of Sciences, in or on property owned or controlled by the
City and County, including but not limited to the Steinhart Aquarium, the
original Natural History Museum, the Simson African Hall and the additions
housing, among other things, the Alexander F. Morrison Planetarium and
Auditorium, are the property of the City and County. However, the buildings and
improvements, and the activities and personnel therein shall be managed and
controlled exclusively by the California Academy of Sciences, except that
employees of the City and County shall be subject to the personnel provisions
of this Charter and their compensation fixed in accordance with this Charter
and City and County funds are subject to the financial provisions of this
Charter.
   The California Academy of Sciences shall submit to the Mayor and Board of
Supervisors an annual financial statement of its activities in connection with
the operation of the buildings described in this section.
   Nothing herein shall abrogate any trust by which any property of the
California Academy of Sciences has been acquired.
SEC. 16.106. CULTURAL, EDUCATIONAL AND RECREATIONAL APPROPRIATIONS.
   The Board of Supervisors shall annually appropriate:
      1.   To the Arts Commission, the revenue from a tax of one-eighth of one
cent ($0.00125) per one hundred dollars ($100) of taxable assessed valuation in
the City and County for maintaining a symphony orchestra;
      2.   To the Asian Art Commission, an amount sufficient for the purpose of
maintaining, displaying, and providing for the security of the City and
County's collection of Asian art;
      3.   To the California Academy of Sciences, funds necessary for the
maintenance, operation and continuance of the Steinhart Aquarium; the Board of
Supervisors shall have the power to furnish to the California Academy of
Sciences such funds as the Board shall deem proper for the maintenance,
operation and continuance of any or all other of the buildings and improvements
placed under the control of the California Academy of Sciences;
      4.   To the Fine Arts Museums Board of Trustees, an amount sufficient for
the purpose of maintaining, operating, providing for the security of, expanding
and superintending the fine arts museums and for the purchase of objects of
art, literary productions and other personal property;
      5.   To the War Memorial and Performing Arts Center Board of Trustees, an
amount sufficient to defray the cost of maintaining, operating and caring for
the War Memorial and Performing Arts Center;
      6.   To the Library Commission, the revenue from a minimum tax of one
cent ($0.01) per hundred dollars ($100) of taxable assessed valuation for
constructing, maintaining and improving the library system of the City and
County;
      7.   To the Recreation and Park Commission, the revenue from a minimum
tax of two and one-half cents ($0.025) per one hundred dollars ($100) of
taxable assessed valuation for constructing, maintaining and improving parks
and squares, and the revenue from a minimum tax of one and three quarter cents
($0.0175) per one hundred dollars ($100) of taxable assessed valuation for
constructing, maintaining and improving playgrounds; and
      8.   To the Arts Commission, for the City and County-owned Community
Cultural Centers, an amount sufficient for the purpose of maintaining,
operating, providing for the security and superintending of their facilities
and grounds, and for the purchase of objects of art, literary productions, and
other property, and for their expansion and continuance in the City and County
of San Francisco.
SEC. 16.107. PARK, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE FUND.
   (a)   Establishment of Fund. There is hereby established the Park,
Recreation and Open Space Fund ("Fund") to be administered by the Recreation
and Park Department ("Department") as directed by the Recreation and Park
Commission ("Commission"). Monies in the Fund shall be expended or used solely
by the Department, subject to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of the
Charter, to provide park and recreational services and facilities. The
Department embraces socio-economic and geographic equity as a guiding principle
and commits to expending the funds across its open space and recreational
programs to provide park and recreational access to all of San Francisco's
diverse neighborhoods and communities.
   (b)   Annual Set-aside. The City will continue to set aside from the annual
tax levy, for a period of forty-five years starting with the fiscal year 2000-
2001 and through and including fiscal year 2045-2046, an amount equivalent to
an annual tax of two and one-half cents ($0.025) for each $100 assessed
valuation. Beginning in fiscal year 2016-2017, revenues from the set-aside,
together with interest, shall be deposited into the Park, Recreation and Open
Space Fund. Revenues from the set-aside shall be in addition to the baseline
appropriation required by subsection (c).
      The Controller shall set aside and maintain such an amount, together with
any interest earned thereon, in the Fund, and any amount unspent or uncommitted
at the end of the fiscal year shall be carried forward to the next fiscal year
and, subject to the budgetary and fiscal limitations of this Charter, shall be
appropriated then or thereafter for the purposes specified in this Section
16.107.
   (c)   Baseline Maintenance of Effort. The annual set-aside shall be used
exclusively to increase the aggregate City appropriations to and expenditures
by the Recreation and Park Department for Department purposes. To this end,
beginning in fiscal year 2016-2017 and thereafter through fiscal year 2045-
2046, the City shall not reduce the baseline general fund support amount
appropriated to the Department below the amount appropriated in fiscal year
2015-2016, as calculated by the Controller, except that the baseline amount
shall be adjusted as follows:
      (1)   Each year in fiscal years 2016-2017 through 2025-2026, the City
shall increase the baseline appropriation by $3 million over the prior year.
      (2)   Each year in fiscal years 2026-2027 through 2045-2046, the City
shall adjust the baseline by the percentage increase or decrease in aggregate
City discretionary revenues, as determined by the Controller, based on
calculations consistent from year to year. In determining aggregate City
discretionary revenues, the Controller shall only include revenues received by
the City which are unrestricted and may be used at the option of the Mayor and
the Board of Supervisors for any lawful City purpose. Additionally, in
determining aggregate City discretionary revenues, the Controller shall not
include revenues received by the City under the increased rates in Business and
Tax Regulations Code Sections 953.1(g), 953.2(h), 953.3(h), 953.4(e), 953.5(d),
953.6(f), 953.7(d), and 953.8(i) adopted by the voters at the general municipal
election on November 3, 2020, and shall not include revenues received by the
City under Article 36 of the Business and Tax Regulations Code adopted by the
voters at the general municipal election on November 3, 2020. The Controller is
authorized to increase or reduce budgetary appropriations as required by this
subsection (c) to align the baseline amount to the amount required by formula
based on actual revenues received during the fiscal year.
      (3)   The City may suspend growth in the baseline funding pursuant to
subsection (c)(1) in fiscal year 2016-2017 if the City's projected budget
deficit for that year at the time of the Joint Report or Update to the Five
Year Financial Plan as prepared jointly by the Controller, the Mayor's Budget
Director, and the Board of Supervisors' Budget Analyst exceeds 200 million. For
fiscal year 2017-2018 through fiscal year 2045-2046, the City may suspend
growth in baseline funding pursuant to subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) when the
projected budget deficit for the upcoming fiscal year at the time of the Joint
Report or Update to the Five Year Financial Plan as prepared jointly by the
Controller, the Mayor's Budget Director, and the Board of Supervisors' Budget
Analyst exceeds $200 million adjusted annually by changes in aggregate City
discretionary revenues.
      (4)   Monies from the baseline appropriation required by this subsection
(c) shall not be appropriated or expended for services provided to the
Recreation and Park Department by other City departments and agencies unless:
(A) the City department or agency charged the Recreation and Park Department
for that service in fiscal year 2015-2016 and the amount the Recreation and
Park Department paid the City department or agency for that service was
included in the baseline amount for fiscal year 2015-2016, although increases
in the cost of such services may be paid out of the baseline appropriation, or
(B) the Recreation and Park Department requests or agrees to a new service from
a City department or agency.
      (5)   At the end of the fiscal year 2015-2016 and every year thereafter,
any excess general fund Departmental revenue, including any Department
expenditure savings or revenue surpluses deposited prior to fiscal year 2015-
2016, shall be reserved to be used for one-time Departmental expenditures.
"General fund Departmental revenue" is defined as all revenues credited to the
Department's general fund budget other than the baseline contribution defined
in subsection (c).
   (d)   The City shall implement its efforts to increase revenues in a manner
consistent with the City's policy of charging City residents a lower fee than
that charged nonresidents for the use and enjoyment of Department property.
   (e)   Revenue Bond Authority. Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in
Sections
9.107,
9.108, and
9.109 of this Charter, the Commission may request, and upon recommendation of
the Mayor the Board of Supervisors may authorize, the issuance of revenue bonds
or other evidences of indebtedness, or the incurrence of other obligations,
secured by the Park, Recreation and Open Space Fund for acquisition,
construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation and/or improvement of real
property and/or facilities and for the purchase of equipment.
   (f)   Fund Expenditures on Commission Property. Any real property acquired
with monies from the Fund, including the proceeds of obligations issued
pursuant to subsection (e), above, shall be placed under the jurisdiction of
the Commission within the meaning of Section
4.113. Fund expenditures to improve, construct, reconstruct or rehabilitate
real property shall be limited to property under the jurisdiction of the
Commission or property under the jurisdiction of another City department or
public agency and subject to an agreement with the Department for its use,
management and maintenance.
   (g)   Use and Allocation of the Fund. Each year, the Commission shall adopt
a budget for the allocation and expenditure of the Fund in compliance with the
budget and fiscal provisions of the Charter. The annual budget for allocation
of the Fund that is adopted by the Commission and submitted by the Mayor to the
Board of Supervisors shall include:
      (1)   Allocations for after-school recreation programs, urban forestry,
community gardens, volunteer programs, and a significant natural areas
management program in the amounts allocated for each of those programs from the
Park and Open Space Fund in the Department's fiscal year 2015-2016 budget, to
the extent that such programs are not so funded in the Department's operating
budget or in the budget of another City department.
      (2)   An allocation necessary to ensure that 3% of the monies to be
deposited in the Fund during the upcoming fiscal year pursuant to subsection
(b), above, be available at the start of the fiscal year as an undesignated
contingency reserve. No later than September 1, 2017, the Commission shall
adopt a policy for expenditures from the contingency reserve. Thereafter, the
Commission shall submit a report to the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors on
any expenditures from the contingency reserve during the previous budget cycle
along with its proposed budget for allocation of the Fund.
      (3)   An allocation of not less than 5% of the monies to be deposited in
the Fund during the upcoming fiscal year pursuant to subsection (b), above.
These monies shall be dedicated to the acquisition of real property identified
in the Capital Expenditure Plan discussed in subsection (h)(3), below. Any
portion of these monies that remains unspent or uncommitted at the end of any
fiscal year shall be carried forward, with interest thereon, to the next fiscal
year for the purposes set forth herein.
      (4)   An allocation, as a separate line item, of funds required for
preparation, monitoring, and evaluation of the plans required under subsection
(h).
      Prior to the adoption of the annual budget by the Recreation and Park
Commission, the Department, in conjunction with the Parks, Recreation, and Open
Space Advisory Committee ("Advisory Committee") discussed in subsection (i),
below, shall conduct two public hearings in the evenings or on weekends to
permit the public to comment on the Department's full budget and programming
allocations.
      The Board of Supervisors shall consider and apply the Planning and
Reporting Measures, including equity metrics, required in subsection (h) when
reviewing and approving the Department's budget.
   (h)   Planning and Reporting Measures. The Commission shall adopt several
long-term plans that include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)    Metrics. The Department shall develop, and the Commission shall
adopt, a set of equity metrics to be used to establish a baseline of existing
Recreation and Park services and resources in low-income neighborhoods and
disadvantaged communities, compared to services and resources available in the
City as a whole. Following Commission approval, the Department shall submit its
Equity Metrics to the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors.
      (2)   Strategic Plan. By February 1, 2017, and every five years
thereafter, the Department shall prepare, for Commission consideration and
approval, a five-year Strategic Plan that establishes or reaffirms the mission,
vision, goals and objectives for the Department. The Strategic Plan shall
include an equity analysis of Recreation and Park services and resources, using
the equity metrics adopted under subsection (h)(1), and shall include
strategies to mitigate any equity deficiencies identified in the Plan.
         The Department shall submit the proposed Strategic Plan to the Parks,
Recreation, and Open Space Advisory Committee for its review and comment before
submitting the Plan to the Commission for its approval. Following Commission
approval of the Strategic Plan, the Department shall submit the Strategic Plan
to the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors shall
consider and by resolution express its approval or disapproval of the Plan, but
may not modify the Plan. If the Board expresses its disapproval of the Plan or
makes recommendations regarding the Plan to the Department, the Department may
modify and resubmit the Plan.
         The Department will use the approved Strategic Plan to guide its work
over each five-year period. Every two years after the approval of a Strategic
Plan, the Department shall report to the Commission on the Department's
progress under the Plan and, subject to the Commission's approval, may amend
the Plan as appropriate. Following Commission approval of any amendments to the
Strategic Plan, the Department may submit the amended Strategic Plan to the
Mayor and the Board of Supervisors.
      (3)   Capital Expenditure Plan. By January 15, 2017 and for each annual
or biennial budgetary cycle thereafter, as determined under Charter Section
9.101, the Department shall prepare, for Commission consideration and approval,
an annual Capital Expenditure Plan that addresses the development, renovation,
replacement and maintenance of capital assets, and the acquisition of real
property projected during the life of the Department's five-year Strategic
Plan. The Capital Expenditure Plan shall include an equity analysis of
Recreation and Park capital expenditures, using the equity metrics adopted
under subsection (h)(1), and shall include strategies to mitigate any equity
deficiencies identified in the Plan. The Capital Expenditure Plan shall further
address irrigation, water conservation, and urban forestry on park lands.
         The Department shall submit the proposed Capital Expenditure Plan to
the Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Advisory Committee for its review and
comment before submitting the Plan to the Commission for its approval.
Following Commission approval, the Department shall submit the Capital
Expenditure Plan to the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors. The Board of
Supervisors shall consider and by resolution express its approval or
disapproval of the Plan, but may not modify the Plan. If the Board expresses
its disapproval of the Plan or makes recommendations regarding the Plan to the
Department, the Department may modify and resubmit the Plan.
         The Department shall further cooperate in the development of the
City's Capital Expenditure Plan under Administrative Code Section 3.20, as
amended, or any successor legislation.
      (4)   Operational Plan. By February 1, 2017, and for each annual or
biennial budgetary cycle thereafter, as determined under Charter Section
9.101, the Department shall prepare, for Commission consideration and approval,
an Operational Plan. The Department shall base the Operational Plan on the
then-current Strategic Plan, and the Operational Plan shall be in addition to
the Department's budget. The Department shall include in the Operational Plan a
statement of the objectives and initiatives within the Strategic Plan that the
Department plans to undertake and/or accomplish during the next budgetary
period, including performance indicators and targets. The Operational Plan
shall include an equity analysis of Recreation and Park services and resources,
using the equity metrics adopted under subsection (h)(1). Each Operational Plan
shall further include an assessment of the Department's progress on the
previous Operational Plan.
         The Department shall submit the proposed Operational Plan to the
Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Advisory Committee for its review and comment
before submitting the Plan to the Commission for its approval. Following
Commission approval, the Department shall submit the Operational Plan to the
Mayor and the Board of Supervisors.
      The Commission shall establish a community input process, which shall
include the Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Advisory Committee discussed in
section (i), below, through which citizens of the City and County of San
Francisco will provide assistance to the Commission as it develops criteria and
establishes the plans required by this subsection. Prior to the adoption of any
Strategic Plan, the Department shall conduct at least five hearings in
locations distributed geographically throughout the City to receive and to
consider the public's comments upon the plan. The Commission shall ensure that
at least two of these hearings are held in the evenings or on weekends for the
public's convenience.
      In the fourth year of each Strategic Plan under subsection (h)(2), the
Controller's City Services Auditor shall conduct a performance audit of the
Department to assess the Department's progress under the Strategic Plan and to
inform the development of the Department's next Strategic Plan. The audit shall
include an analysis of the Department's compliance with the planning and
reporting measures in this subsection (h). The costs of the audit may be
charged to the baseline established in subsection (c).
      If the audit finds that the Department has not complied with the
requirements in this subsection (h), the Board of Supervisors may place up to
5% of the baseline appropriation under subsection (c) for the next fiscal year
on reserve, pending subsequent release of the reserve by Board action upon
finding progress toward these requirements. The preceding sentence is not
intended to modify the Board's authority under the fiscal and budgetary
provisions of the Charter.
      The Commission may modify any deadlines contained in this subsection (h)
by resolution adopted by a two-thirds vote of its members, and a resolution
adopted by the Board of Supervisors and approved by the Mayor.
   (i)   Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Advisory Committee. The Board of
Supervisors shall establish, by ordinance, a Parks, Recreation, and Open Space
Advisory Committee, such as the committee established in Park Code Section
13.01, as amended, or any successor legislation.
   (j)   Equity Fund. The City shall establish an Equity Fund to accept and
expend private gifts, grants, and donations received by the Department and
intended to support initiatives and programs addressing unmet program and
capital needs identified in the equity analyses required under subsection (h).
   (k)   Environmental and Design Guidelines. The Department shall maintain
written environmental and design guidelines for new facilities, parks, and open
spaces and the renovation or rehabilitation of existing facilities, parks, and
open spaces.
   (l)   Capital Projects. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
3.104 of this Charter, the Commission shall have the authority to prepare and
approve the plans, specifications and estimates for all contracts and orders,
and to award, execute and manage all contracts and orders, for capital projects
on real property under its jurisdiction or management. Capital projects
supported by the Fund, other than those projects identified by the Department
as long-term projects, must be fully constructed within three years of the
initial budget allocation for those projects. Long-term projects must be fully
constructed within five years of the initial budget allocation. Any exceptions
to this provision must be authorized by a two-thirds vote of the Commission.
   (m)   In addition to the requirements set forth by this Section
16.107, all expenditures from the Fund shall be subject to the budget and
fiscal provisions of the Charter.
   (n)   This Section
16.107 shall expire by operation of law at the end of fiscal year 2045-2046 and
the City Attorney shall cause it to be removed from future editions of the
Charter unless the Section is extended by the voters.
(Amended March 2000, June 2016; Proposition_F, Approved 11/3/2020)
SEC. 16.108. CHILDREN AND YOUTH FUND.
   (a)   Preamble.
      (1)   By overwhelmingly reauthorizing the Children's Fund in 2000 with 74
percent approval, the people of the City and County of San Francisco found and
declared that the Children's Fund (now to be known as the Children and Youth
Fund) is essential in ensuring the health and success of every San Francisco
child.
      (2)   The previous investment of the Children and Youth Fund allowed for
the Department of Children, Youth, and Their Families to serve over 56,000
youth in FY 2012-2013, focusing on the children with the most need.
      (3)   The Fund successfully stabilized and expanded services for
children, youth, and their families, while leveraging other resources.
      (4)   Addressing the level of unmet need among children and youth remains
a significant challenge. The needs of San Francisco's children have been
increasing:
         (A)   One-third of San Francisco's African American and Latino
children live below the poverty line. The number of San Francisco children in
poverty has increased by 14% in the past 5 years.
         (B)   The federal poverty level for a family of four is $23,000;
adjusted to San Francisco, it is $35,000. Self-sufficiency in San Francisco for
a family of four is three times that amount, and over half of all families
cannot meet the self-sufficiency standard. The Children and Youth Fund provides
services that support families and opportunities for children and youth that
are essential to meeting their needs and providing pathways out of poverty.
         (C)   State and federal cuts have significantly reduced children and
youth services in San Francisco, including funding for child care, youth
employment and high need disconnected transitional-aged youth.
      (5)   The reauthorization of the Children and Youth Fund will enable the
Department of Children, Youth and Their Families (DCYF) to build on the
previous success of the Fund and strengthen DCYF's capacity for the future,
while fostering innovation and improving transparency and accountability.
   (b)   Fund for Children and Youth Services. Operative July 1, 2001, there is
hereby established a fund to expand children's services, which shall be called
the Children and Youth Fund ("Fund"). Monies in the Fund shall be expended or
used only to provide services for children and youth as provided in this
Section
16.108.
   (c)   Goals. The goals of expenditures from the Fund and the planning
process created in this section of the Charter shall be:
      (1)   To ensure that San Francisco's children are healthy, ready to
learn, succeed in school and live in stable, safe and supported families and
communities;
      (2)   To ensure that San Francisco is a family-friendly city and to
support families as an important part of the City population and civic culture;
      (3)   To focus on the prevention of problems and on supporting and
enhancing the strengths of children, youth and their families;
      (4)   To complement the City's community development efforts;
      (5)   To strengthen a community-based network of services in all
neighborhoods;
      (6)   To ensure that children and youth with the highest needs receive
maximum benefit from the Fund and that equity is a guiding principle of the
funding process;
      (7)   To distribute funds based on best practices, and successful and
innovative models in order to ensure maximum impact;
      (8)   To the maximum extent feasible, to distribute funds equitably among
services for all age groups – from infancy to transitional-aged youth;
      (9)   To ensure children are provided with gender-responsive and
culturally-competent services;
      (10)   To strengthen collaboration around shared outcomes among all
service providers for children, youth and their families, including
collaboration among public agencies and non-profit organizations; and
      (11)   To fill gaps in services and leverage other resources whenever
feasible.
   (d)   Amount. There is hereby set aside for the Fund, from the revenues of
the property tax levy, revenues in an amount equivalent to an annual tax of
three cents ($.03) per one hundred dollars ($100) of assessed valuation for
each fiscal year beginning with July 1, 2001-June 30, 2002, and ending with
July 1, 2014-June 30, 2015.
      For Fiscal Year 2015-2016, there is hereby set aside for the Fund, from
the revenues of the property tax levy, revenues in an amount equivalent to an
annual tax of three and one-quarter cents ($.0325) per one hundred dollars
($100) of assessed valuation for each fiscal year.
      For Fiscal Year 2016-2017, there is hereby set aside for the Fund, from
the revenues of the property tax levy, revenues in an amount equivalent to an
annual tax of three and one half cents ($.0350) per one hundred dollars ($100)
of assessed valuation for each fiscal year.
      For Fiscal Year 2017-2018, there is hereby set aside for the Fund, from
the revenues of the property tax levy, revenues in an amount equivalent to an
annual tax of three and three quarters cents ($.0375) per one hundred dollars
($100) of assessed valuation for each fiscal year.
      For Fiscal Year 2018-2019, and every fiscal year thereafter through
Fiscal Year 2040-2041, there is hereby set aside for the Fund, from the
revenues of the property tax levy, revenues in an amount equivalent to an
annual tax of four cents ($.04) per one hundred dollars ($100) of assessed
valuation for each fiscal year.
      The Fund shall be maintained separate and apart from all other City and
County funds and appropriated by annual or supplemental appropriation.
   (e)   New Services. Monies in the Fund shall be used exclusively for the
costs of services to children less than 18 years old provided as part of
programs that predominantly serve children less than 18 years old and for
Disconnected Transitional-Aged Youth 18 through 24 years old. "Disconnected
Transitional-Aged Youth" are those who: are homeless or in danger of
homelessness; have dropped out of high school; have a disability or other
special needs, including substance abuse; are low-income parents; are
undocumented; are new immigrants and/or English Learners; are Lesbian, Gay,
Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, and Questioning ("LGBTQQ"); and/or are
transitioning from the foster care, juvenile justice, criminal justice or
special education system. Monies from the Fund shall not be appropriated or
expended for services that received any of the funds included in the higher of
the Controller's baseline budget covering July 1, 2000-June 30, 2001
appropriations, or the Controller's baseline budget covering July 1, 1999-June
30, 2000 appropriations, whether or not the cost of such services increases.
Nor shall monies from the Fund be appropriated or expended for services that
substitute for or replace services included or partially included in the higher
of the two baseline budgets, except and solely to the extent that the City
ceases to receive federal, state or private agency funds that the funding
agency required to be spent only on those services. The Controller's baseline
budget shall mean the Controller's calculation of the actual amount of City
appropriations for services for children that would have been eligible to be
paid from the Fund but are paid from other sources.
   (f)   Eligible Uses. The City shall only use monies from the Fund for the
following purposes:
      (1)   Services for children up to 18 years old and Disconnected
Transitional-Aged Youth up to and including 24 years old, including:
         (A)   Affordable child care and early education;
         (B)   Recreation, cultural and after-school programs, including
without limitation, arts programs;
         (C)   Health services, including prevention, education, and behavioral
and mental health services;
         (D)   Training, employment and job placement;
         (E)   Youth empowerment and leadership development;
         (F)   Youth violence prevention programs;
         (G)   Youth tutoring and educational enrichment programs;
         (H)   Family and parent support services;
         (I)   Support for collaboration among grantees to enhance service
delivery and provider capacity-building, and for community development efforts;
and
         (J)   Services responsive to issues of gender, sexual orientation, and
gender identification, including, but not limited to, services to address the
needs of girls and LGBTQQ communities.
      (2)   Funding for the Department of Children, Youth and Their Families
("DCYF") and the Children, Youth and Their Families Oversight and Advisory
Committee created in Section
16.108-1 ("Oversight and Advisory Committee").
      (3)   Administration of the Fund and evaluation of Fund goals and
services.
      (4)   Technical assistance and capacity-building for service providers
and community-based partners.
   (g)   Excluded Services. Notwithstanding subsection (f), services for
children and Disconnected Transitional-Aged Youth paid for by the Fund shall
not include:
      (1)   Services provided by the Police Department or other law enforcement
agencies, courts, the District Attorney, Public Defender, City Attorney; or the
Fire Department; detention or probation services mandated by state or federal
law; or public transportation;
      (2)   Any service that benefits children and Disconnected Transitional-
Aged Youth incidentally or as members of a larger population including adults;
      (3)   Any service for which a fixed or minimum level of expenditure is
mandated by state or federal law, to the extent of the fixed or minimum level
of expenditure;
      (4)   Acquisition of any capital item not for primary and direct use by
children and Disconnected Transitional-Aged Youth;
      (5)   Acquisition (other than by lease for a term of ten years or less)
of any real property or land, or capital expenditures, or predevelopment or
construction costs for housing;
      (6)   Maintenance, utilities or any similar operating costs of any
facility not used primarily and directly by children and Disconnected
Transitional-Aged Youth, or of any recreation or park facility (including a
zoo), library, hospital, or housing; or
      (7)   Medical health services, other than prevention, education, and
behavioral and mental health support services.
   (h)   Baseline. The Fund shall be used exclusively to increase the aggregate
City appropriations and expenditures for those services for children and
Disconnected Transitional-Aged Youth that are eligible to be paid from the Fund
(exclusive of expenditures mandated by state or federal law). To this end, the
City shall not reduce the amount of such City appropriations for eligible
services (not including appropriations from the Fund and exclusive of
expenditures mandated by state or federal law) under this section below the
amount so appropriated for the fiscal year 2000-2001 ("the base year") as set
forth in the Controller's baseline budget, as adjusted ("the base amount").
      The Controller shall calculate City appropriations made in fiscal year
2013-2014 for services for Disconnected Transitional-Aged Youth aged 18 through
24 years. Beginning with fiscal year 2014-2015, that amount shall be added to
the base amount and adjusted as provided below. The City shall not reduce the
amount of such City appropriations for services for Disconnected Transitional-
Aged Youth (not including appropriations from the Fund and exclusive of
expenditures mandated by state or federal law) under this section below the
amount so appropriated for fiscal year 2013-2014, as adjusted.
      The base amount shall be adjusted for each year after the base year by
the Controller based on calculations consistent from year to year by the
percentage increase or decrease in aggregate City and County discretionary
revenues. In determining aggregate City and County discretionary revenues, the
Controller shall only include revenues received by the City and County that are
unrestricted and may be used at the option of the Mayor and the Board of
Supervisors for any lawful City purpose. Additionally, in determining aggregate
City and County discretionary revenues, the Controller shall not include
revenues received by the City under the increased rates in Business and Tax
Regulations Code Sections 953.1(g), 953.2(h), 953.3(h), 953.4(e), 953.5(d),
953.6(f), 953.7(d), and 953.8(i) adopted by the voters at the general municipal
election on November 3, 2020, and shall not include revenues received by the
City under Article 36 of the Business and Tax Regulations Code adopted by the
voters at the general municipal election on November 3, 2020. Errors in the
Controller’s estimate of discretionary revenues for a fiscal year shall be
corrected by an adjustment in the next year’s estimate. Within 90 days
following the end of each fiscal year through Fiscal Year 2040-2041, the
Controller shall calculate and publish the actual amount of City appropriations
for services for children and Disconnected Transitional-Aged Youth that would
have been eligible to be paid from the Fund but are paid from other sources,
separately identifying expenditures mandated by state or federal law.
   (i)   Five-Year Planning Cycle. The City shall appropriate monies from the
Fund according to a five-year planning process. This process is intended to:
(1) increase transparency, accountability, and public engagement; (2) provide
time and opportunities for community participation and planning; (3) ensure
program stability; and (4) maximize the effectiveness of the services funded.
      (1)   Year 1 – Community Needs Assessment. During every fifth fiscal year
beginning with Fiscal Year 2015-2016, DCYF shall conduct a Community Needs
Assessment (CNA) to identify services to receive monies from the Fund. The CNA
should include qualitative and quantitative data sets collected through
interviews, focus groups, surveys, or other outreach mechanisms to determine
service gaps in programming for children, youth, and families. Subject to the
budgetary and fiscal provisions of the Charter, DCYF may contract with
consultants and outside experts for such services as the department may require
to prepare the CNA. DCYF shall undertake a robust community process in every
supervisorial district, soliciting input from a diverse cross-section of
parents, youth, non-profit organizations, and other key stakeholders to develop
the CNA:
         (A)   DCYF shall develop a plan for how to conduct the CNA. The CNA
shall include an equity analysis of services and resources for parents,
children, and youth. DCYF shall develop a set of equity metrics to be used to
establish a baseline of existing services and resources in low-income
neighborhoods and disadvantaged communities, compared to services and resources
available in the City as a whole. The outreach for the CNA shall create
opportunities for parents, youth, nonprofit agencies, and other members of the
public, to provide input. By September 1, DCYF shall provide its plan for
conducting the CNA to the Oversight and Advisory Committee, the Service
Provider Working Group created in Section
16.108-1(e), and the Board of Supervisors. The plan shall be a public document.
         (B)   By March 1, DCYF shall complete a draft CNA and provide this
draft to the Oversight and Advisory Committee and the Service Provider Working
Group for review. DCYF shall also provide the draft CNA to interested City
departments, including the First Five Commission, the Office of Early Care and
Education (or any successor entity), the Recreation and Park Commission, the
Health Commission, the Human Services Commission, the Youth Commission, the
Juvenile Probation Commission, the Adult Probation Department, the Commission
on the Status of Women, the Police Commission, the Library Commission, and the
Arts Commission.
         (C)   By April 1, DCYF shall submit a final version of the CNA to the
Oversight and Advisory Committee and the Board of Supervisors. The final
version may incorporate any comments or suggestions made by the public or by
the agencies that received copies of the draft CNA.
         (D)   By May 1, the Oversight and Advisory Committee shall provide
input on, approve or disapprove the CNA. If the Oversight and Advisory
Committee disapproves the report, DCYF may modify and resubmit the report.
         (E)   By June 1, the Board of Supervisors shall consider and approve
or disapprove, or modify, the CNA. If the Board disapproves the CNA, DCYF may
modify and resubmit the CNA, provided, however, that the City may not expend
monies from the Fund until the Board of Supervisors has approved the CNA.
      (2)   Year 2 – Services and Allocation Plan. During every fifth fiscal
year beginning with Fiscal Year 2016-2017, DCYF shall prepare a Services and
Allocation Plan ("SAP") to determine services eligible to receive monies from
the Fund. DCYF shall use the following process to prepare the SAP:
         (A)   DCYF shall prepare a draft SAP in consultation with interested
City departments, including the First Five Commission, the Office of Early Care
and Education (or any successor entity), the Recreation and Park Commission,
the Health Commission, the Human Services Commission, the Youth Commission, the
Juvenile Probation Commission, the Adult Probation Department, the Commission
on the Status of Women, the Police Commission, the Library Commission, and the
Arts Commission, as well as the San Francisco Unified School District,
community-based service providers, parents, children, youth, and other members
of the public. The SAP must:
            (i)   Demonstrate consistency with the CNA and with Citywide vision
and goals for children and families;
            (ii)   Include all services for children and Disconnected
Transitional-Aged Youth;
            (iii)   Be outcome-oriented and include goals and measurable and
verifiable objectives and outcomes;
            (iv)   Include capacity-building and evaluation of services as
separate funding areas;
            (v)   State how services will be coordinated and have specific
amounts allocated towards specific goals, service models, populations and
neighborhoods;
            (vi)   Include funding for youth-initiated projects totaling at
least 3 percent of the total proposed expenditures from the Fund for the cycle;
            (vii)   Include evaluation data from the previous funding cycle and
the details of the Children and Youth Baseline; and,
            (viii)   Incorporate strategies to coordinate and align all
services for children funded by all governmental or private entities and
administered by the City, whether or not those services are eligible to receive
monies from the Fund.
         (B)   The SAP shall include an equity analysis of services and
resources for parents, children and youth. Using the equity metrics developed
for preparation of the CNA, the SAP shall compare proposed new, augmented, and
coordinated services and resources for low-income neighborhoods and
disadvantaged communities with services and resources available to the City as
a whole.
         (C)   Subject to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of the Charter,
DCYF may contract with consultants and outside experts for such services as the
department may require to prepare the SAP, including the equity analysis of
services and resources for parents, children and youth.
         (D)   By March 1, DCYF shall provide the draft SAP to the Oversight
and Advisory Committee and the Service Provider Working Group. DCYF shall also
provide the draft SAP to the San Francisco Unified School District and
interested City departments, including the First Five Commission, the Office of
Early Care and Education (or any successor entity), the Recreation and Park
Commission, the Health Commission, the Human Services Commission, the Youth
Commission, the Juvenile Probation Commission, the Adult Probation Department,
the Commission on the Status of Women, the Police Commission, the Library
Commission and the Arts Commission.
         (E)   By April 1, DCYF shall submit a final version of SAP to the
Oversight and Advisory Committee and the Board of Supervisors. The final
version may incorporate any comments or suggestions made by the public or by
the agencies that received copies of the draft SAP.
         (F)   By May 1, the Oversight and Advisory Committee shall approve or
disapprove the SAP. If the Oversight and Advisory Committee disapproves the
SAP, DCYF may modify and resubmit the SAP.
         (G)   By June 1, the Board of Supervisors shall consider and approve
or disapprove, or modify, the SAP. If the Board disapproves the SAP, DCYF may
modify and resubmit the SAP, provided, however, that the City may not expend
monies from the Fund until the SAP has been approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
         (H)   During subsequent years of the planning cycle, DCYF, with the
approval of the Oversight and Advisory Committee and the Board of Supervisors,
may amend the SAP to address emerging needs.
      (3)   Year 3 – Selection of Contractors. During every fifth fiscal year
beginning with Fiscal Year 2017-2018, DCYF shall conduct competitive
solicitations for services to be funded from the Fund.
      (4)   Year 4 – Service Cycle Begins. Contracts for services shall start
on July 1 of Year 4 of the planning cycle, beginning with Fiscal Year 2018-
2019. During subsequent years of the planning cycle, DCYF, with the approval of
the Oversight and Advisory Committee, may issue supplemental competitive
solicitations to address amendments to the SAP and emerging needs. All
expenditures for services from the Fund shall be consistent with the most
recent CNA and SAP.
      (5)   DCYF may recommend, and the Oversight and Advisory Committee and
the Board of Supervisors may approve, changes to the due dates and timelines
provided in this subsection (i). The Board of Supervisors shall approve such
changes by ordinance.
   (j)   Evaluation. DCYF shall provide for the evaluation on a regular basis
of all services funded through the Fund, and shall prepare on a regular basis
an Evaluation and Data Report for the Oversight and Advisory Committee. Subject
to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of the Charter, DCYF may contract with
consultants and outside experts for such services as the department may require
to conduct such evaluations and to prepare the Evaluation and Data Report.
   (k)   Selection of Contractors. The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall
recommend standards and procedures for the selection of contractors to be
funded from the Fund. It shall be the policy of the City to use competitive
solicitation processes where appropriate and to give priority to the
participation of non-profit agencies.
   (l)   Implementation.
      (1)   In implementation of this Section
16.108, facilitating public participation and maximizing availability of
information to the public shall be primary goals.
      (2)   DCYF shall administer the Fund and prepare the CNA and the SAP
pursuant to this Section
16.108.
      (3)   The Board of Supervisors may by ordinance implement this Section
16.108.
   (m)   Effect of Procedural Errors. No appropriation, contract or other
action shall be held invalid or set aside by reason of any error, including
without limitation any irregularity, informality, neglect or omission, in
carrying out procedures specified in subsections (i) through (l) unless a court
finds that the party challenging the action suffered substantial injury from
the error and that a different result would have been probable had the error
not occurred.
(Amended November 2000; November 2014; Proposition_F, Approved 11/3/2020)
SEC. 16.108-1. CHILDREN, YOUTH AND THEIR FAMILIES OVERSIGHT AND ADVISORY
COMMITTEE.
   (a)   Creation. There shall be a Children, Youth and Their Families
Oversight and Advisory Committee ("Oversight and Advisory Committee") to review
the governance and policies of the Department of Children, Youth and Their
Families ("DCYF"), to monitor and participate in the administration of the
Children and Youth Fund as provided in Charter Section
16.108 ("Fund"), and to take steps to ensure that the Fund is administered in a
manner accountable to the community.
   (b)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall develop recommendations
for DCYF and the Fund regarding outcomes for children and youth services, the
evaluation of services, common data systems, a process for making funding
decisions, program improvement and capacity-building of service providers,
community engagement in planning and evaluating services, leveraging dollars of
the Fund and the use of the Fund as a catalyst for innovation. The Oversight
and Advisory Committee shall promote and facilitate transparency in the
administration of the Fund.
      (2)   As provided in Section
16.108, the Oversight and Advisory Committee shall review and approve the
planning process for the Community Needs Assessment ("CNA") and the final CNA,
the Services and Allocation Plan, and DCYF's overall spending plan (including,
as separate items, approval of the departmental budget and of DCYF's proposed
grants as a package), and shall review the annual Data and Evaluation Report.
Nothing in this Section shall limit the authority of the Mayor and the Board of
Supervisors to propose, amend, and adopt a budget under Article IX of the
Charter.
      (3)   The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall participate in the
evaluation of the Director of DCYF, assist in recruitment for the Director when
the position is vacant, and may recommend candidates to the Mayor.
      (4)   The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall establish and maintain a
Service Provider Working Group as provided in subsection (e).
      (5)   The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall meet at least six times
a year.
   (c)   Composition. The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall have eleven
members. The Mayor shall appoint members for Seats 1 through 6. The Board of
Supervisors shall appoint members for Seats 7 through 11. The Mayor and the
Board of Supervisors shall appoint the initial members of the Committee by July
1, 2015. The terms of the initial appointees to the Committee shall commence on
the date of the first meeting of the Committee, which may occur when at least
eight members have been appointed and are present.
   (d)   Implementation. The Board of Supervisors shall further provide by
ordinance for the membership, structure, functions, appointment criteria, terms
and support of the Oversight and Advisory Committee. The Board of Supervisors
shall adopt such legislation to be effective by July 1, 2015.
   (e)   Service Provider Working Group. The Oversight and Advisory Committee
shall create a Service Provider Working Group ("Working Group") to advise the
Oversight and Advisory Committee on funding priorities, policy development, the
planning cycle, evaluation design and plans, and any other issues of concern to
the Working Group related to the Fund or the responsibilities of DCYF or other
departments receiving monies from the Fund. The Working Group shall engage a
broad cross-section of service providers in providing information, education
and consultation to the Oversight and Advisory Committee. All members of the
Working Group shall be actively providing services to children, youth and their
families. The Working Group shall be supported by DCYF staff, and shall meet at
least four times a year. The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall appoint two
initial co-chairs of the Working Group, who shall be responsible for developing
the structure of the Working Group and facilitating the meetings. After the
terms of the initial co-chairs expire, the Working Group shall select its own
chairs. Working Group meetings shall be open and encourage widespread
participation.
(Added November 2014)
SEC. 16.109. LIBRARY PRESERVATION FUND.
   (a)   Establishment of Fund. There is hereby established the Library
Preservation Fund (“the Fund”) to be administered by the Library Department as
directed by the Library Commission. Monies therein shall be expended or used
solely by the Library Department, subject to the budgetary and fiscal
provisions of the Charter, to provide library services, acquire books and other
materials and equipment, and construct, improve, rehabilitate, maintain, and
operate library facilities.
   (b)   Annual Set-Aside. The City will continue to set aside from the annual
property tax levy, for a period of 25 years starting with the fiscal year 2023-
2024 an amount equivalent to an annual tax of two and one-half cents ($0.025)
for each one hundred dollars ($100) assessed valuation (“Annual Set-Aside”).
      The Controller shall set aside and maintain such an amount, together with
any interest earned thereon, in the Fund. Revenues obtained from the Annual
Set-Aside shall be in addition to, and not in place of, any General Fund monies
appropriated to the Library pursuant to subsection (c).
   (c)   Baseline Maintenance of Effort. The Annual Set-Aside shall be used
exclusively to increase the aggregate City appropriations and expenditures for
services, materials, facilities, and equipment that will be operated by the
Library Department for Library purposes. To this end, in any of the 25 years
during which funds are required to be set aside under this Section
16.109, the City shall not reduce the Baseline for the Library Department below
the fiscal year 2022-2023 Required Baseline Amount (as calculated by the
Controller), except that the Baseline shall be adjusted as provided below.
      The Baseline shall be adjusted for each year after fiscal year 2022-2023
by the Controller based on calculations consistent from year to year, by the
percentage increase or decrease in aggregate City and County discretionary
revenues, except as provided in subsection (h). In determining aggregate City
and County discretionary revenues, the Controller shall only include revenues
received by the City which are unrestricted and may be used at the option of
the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors for any lawful City purpose. Errors in
the Controller’s estimate of discretionary revenues for a fiscal year shall be
corrected by adjustment in the next year’s estimate. For purposes of this
subsection (c), (i) aggregate City appropriations shall not include funds
granted to the City by private agencies or appropriated by other public
agencies and received by the City, and (ii) Library Department appropriations
shall not include funds appropriated to the Library Department to pay for
services of other City departments or agencies, except for departments or
agencies for whose specific services the Library Department was appropriated
funds in fiscal year 2022-2023. Within 180 days following the end of each
fiscal year through fiscal year 2047-2048, the Controller shall calculate and
publish the actual amount of City appropriations for the Library Department.
      The Controller shall set aside and maintain such baseline amounts,
together with any interest earned thereon, in the Fund.
      At the end of each fiscal year, the Controller shall pro-rate any monies
from the annual Baseline and the Annual Set-Aside that remain uncommitted in
the Fund, and the Baseline portion of such amount shall be returned to the
General Fund. The Annual Set-Aside portion of such amount shall be carried
forward to the next fiscal year and shall be appropriated then or thereafter
for the purposes specified in this Section.
      Adjustments in the Controller’s estimate of the Baseline, including any
Baseline changes required from increases or decreases to City revenues after
the enactment of the annual budget under
Article IX, along with adjustments to the Annual Set-Aside for a fiscal year,
shall be corrected by credits or adjustment to be carried forward and added to
the annual City appropriation for the next fiscal year and, subject to the
budgetary and fiscal limitations of the Charter, shall be appropriated then or
thereafter for the purposes specified in this Section.
   (d)   Debt Authority. Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in Sections
9.107,
9.108, and
9.109 of this Charter, the Library Commission may request, and upon
recommendation of the Mayor the Board of Supervisors may authorize, the
issuance of revenue bonds or other evidences of indebtedness or the incurrence
of lease financing or other obligations (the “Debt Obligations”), the proceeds
of which are to be used for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, and/or improvement of real property and/or facilities that will
be operated by the Library Department for Library purposes and for the purchase
of equipment relating to such real property and/or facilities. Such Debt
Obligations shall be secured by and/or repaid from any available funds pledged
or appropriated by the Board of Supervisors for such purpose, which amount may
include funds in the Fund allocated under subsection (e)(3) of this Section
16.109. Funds appropriated to pay debt service on the Debt Obligations in such
fiscal year under the terms of this Section
16.109 shall be set aside in an account for such use until such payment is
made.
   (e)   Spending Priorities. The Annual Set-Aside and monies carried over from
prior fiscal years in the Fund shall be expended in accordance with the
following priorities:
      (1)   Such allocations as are necessary for the Library Department to
operate the Main Library, which includes the Talking Books and Braille Center,
no fewer than 27 neighborhood branch libraries, and an auxiliary technical
services facility, with at least 1,400 permanent service hours per week system-
wide and the permanent service hours at each neighborhood branch library at
least 95% of the amount set by the Library Commission as of May 31, 2018. The
permanent service hours per week system-wide and the permanent service hours at
any neighborhood branch library may be modified, but only as provided by
subsection (f).
      (2)   Such allocations as are necessary to provide for library services
and collections in all formats in order to meet the current and changing needs
of San Francisco communities, as the Library Commission in its sole discretion
shall approve.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the spending priorities set forth in this
subsection (e), a portion of the Annual Set-Aside may be used each fiscal year
to pay debt service relating to Debt Obligations issued or incurred by the City
under subsection (d). To ensure that debt service payments do not reduce
overall funding available for other Library priorities from current levels,
debt service may be payable from the Annual Set-Aside in any fiscal year in an
amount no greater than:
         (A)   the annual debt service that would be payable under a financing
with the term and principal amount reflected in a Library Commission request
for bond issuance under subsection (d); and
         (B)   the aggregate growth of the Annual Set-Aside amount and the
Baseline amount over the base fiscal year 2022-2023.
         Amounts on deposit in the Annual Set-Aside in excess of such annual
debt service shall be used according to the other priorities of this
subsection.
      (4)   To the extent there are unexpended funds remaining in the Fund
after the requirements of subsections (e)(1) through (e)(3) have been
satisfied, such funds may be used for any lawful purpose of the Library
Department; provided that no such funds shall be used for debt service payments
in any fiscal year in excess of the amount allowed under subsection (e)(3).
   (f)   Library Service Hours. Except as provided in subsections (f)(3) and
(f)(4), the Library Commission shall maintain at least the permanent service
hours per week system-wide and the permanent hours at each neighborhood branch
Library as required by subsection (e)(1) until July 1, 2028. On or after that
date, the Library Commission may modify permanent service hours per week
system-wide and at specific neighborhood branch libraries for succeeding five-
year intervals, or at shorter intervals as the Commission may adopt, and in
accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   No later than March 1, 2028, and at least four months before
adopting each service hour interval thereafter, the Library Commission shall
establish a community input process, which may include an informal survey of
library users and meetings with the Council of Neighborhood Libraries or any
successor entity, and neighborhood groups, through which citizens of the City
may provide assistance to the Library Commission as it develops criteria to set
system-wide and branch service hours for the upcoming interval. Prior to the
Library Commission setting service hours for the next interval, the Library
Department shall conduct at least one hearing in each supervisorial district to
receive and consider the public’s comments about existing and potential Library
service hours. At least six of these hearings, distributed geographically
throughout the City, shall be held in the evenings or on weekends for the
public’s convenience.
      (2)   Following input of the public as described in subsection (f)(1),
and based on the public input, a comprehensive assessment of needs, and the
anticipated adequacy of library resources, the Library Commission may, on or
after July 1, 2028, modify the system-wide and individual neighborhood branch
service hours for the next five-year interval or such shorter interval as the
Library Commission may adopt. The Library Commission shall repeat this public
process and set service hours at least once every five years for the duration
of the Fund.
      (3)   The service hours requirements set in subsection (e)(1) and any
modifications thereto made pursuant to this subsection (f) shall be temporarily
reduced by the normal operating hours for any neighborhood branch temporarily
closed for construction, renovation, or maintenance purposes. In such cases,
the Library Department shall add temporary services elsewhere by adding
temporary hours at nearby branches, providing bookmobile services, securing
programming partners in the affected neighborhoods, or similar means.
      (4)   If library services at any branch or system-wide are interrupted
due to fire, earthquake, or other emergency, the Library Department shall be
relieved of these service hour requirements, provided that the Library
Department shall provide service hours consistent with such exigent
circumstances.
   (g)   Unspent Funds. All unspent funds in the Fund on November 8, 2022 shall
continue to be held for the use and benefit of the Library Department, and the
funds therein shall be used consistent with the requirements of this Section
16.109.
   (h)   Temporary Freezes to Baseline. Notwithstanding any other provision in
this Section
16.109, the City may freeze the Baseline for any fiscal year after fiscal year
2022-2023 at the prior year amounts when the City’s projected budget deficit
for the upcoming fiscal year at the time of the March Joint Report or March
Update to the Five Year Financial Plan as prepared jointly by the Controller,
the Mayor’s Budget Director, and the Board of Supervisors’ Budget Analyst
exceeds $300 million, adjusted annually beginning with fiscal year 2022-2023 by
the percentage increase or decrease in aggregate City discretionary revenues,
as determined by the Controller, based on calculations consistent from year to
year. In determining aggregate City discretionary revenues, the Controller
shall include only revenues received by the City that are unrestricted and may
be used at the option of the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors for any lawful
City purpose.
      In the first two fiscal years following such a freeze, the Controller
shall adjust the Baseline under subsection (c) such that the amount of the
Baseline in the second fiscal year following the freeze shall be the same as it
would have been if there had been no freeze under this subsection (h). Based on
projections of anticipated revenue, the Controller shall implement this
adjustment to the Baseline in approximately equal amounts in each of the two
fiscal years.
   (i)   Expiration. This Section
16.109 shall expire by operation of law on December 31, 2048, after which the
City Attorney may cause it to be removed from the Charter unless the Section is
extended by the voters.
(Amended by Proposition D, Approved 11/6/2007; Proposition_F, Approved 11/3/
2020; Proposition_F, Approved 11/8/2022)
SEC. 16.110. HOUSING TRUST FUND.
   (a)   Creation of Fund. There is hereby established a Housing Trust Fund to
support creating, acquiring and rehabilitating affordable housing and promoting
affordable home ownership programs in the City, as provided in this Section
16.110.
   (b)   Definitions. For purposes of this Section:
      "First Responder" shall mean a City employee who responds first in cases
of natural disaster or emergencies, including, but not limited to, all active
uniformed, sworn members of the San Francisco Police and Fire Departments.
      "General Fund Discretionary Revenues" shall mean revenues that the City
receives and deposits in its treasury, that are unrestricted, and that the City
may appropriate for any lawful City purpose.
      "Household" shall mean any person or persons who reside or intend to
reside in the same housing unit.
      "Mayor's Office of Housing" shall mean the Mayor's Office of Housing and
Community Development or any successor City agency.
   (c)   Funding.
      (1)   In the Fiscal Year 2013-2014 budget, the City shall appropriate to
the Housing Trust Fund $20 million.
      (2)   For the next 11 fiscal years, in each of the annual budgets for
Fiscal Year 2014-2015 through Fiscal Year 2024-2025, the City shall appropriate
to the Housing Trust Fund an amount increasing by $2.8 million per year, until
the annual appropriation required by this Section reaches $50.8 million in the
Fiscal Year 2024-2025 budget.
      (3)   In the annual budgets for Fiscal Year 2025-2026 through Fiscal Year
2042-43, the City shall appropriate to the Housing Trust Fund an amount equal
to the prior year's appropriation, adjusted by the percentage increase or
decrease in General Fund Discretionary Revenues budgeted for the year compared
to the prior year's original budgeted amount of General Fund Discretionary
Revenues.
      (4)   Should the City adopt a fixed two-year budget under Charter Section
9.101, the adjustment for the Housing Trust Fund appropriation for the two
years of the two-year budget shall be based on the amount of General Fund
Discretionary Revenues estimated for the two-year period included in the
budget.
      (5)   During Fiscal Years 2025-2026 through 2042-2043, if the Controller
submits a revised estimate of General Fund Discretionary Revenues for a given
Fiscal Year or two-year budget period that is lower than the amount originally
budgeted for that period, then the Board may, by ordinance, reduce the
appropriation to the Housing Trust Fund for that budget period in an amount
that does not exceed the amount proportionate to the percentage shortfall in
the discretionary revenue projection.
      (6)   The Controller's method of calculating the amount of and changes in
General Fund Discretionary Revenues shall be consistent from fiscal year to
fiscal year and with the Controller's method for calculating those figures
under Charter Sections
8A.105,
16.108, and
16.109. Additionally, in determining General Fund Discretionary Revenues, the
Controller shall not include revenues received by the City under the increased
rates in Business and Tax Regulations Code Sections 953.1(g), 953.2(h), 953.3
(h), 953.4(e), 953.5(d), 953.6(f), 953.7(d), and 953.8(i) adopted by the voters
at the general municipal election on November 3, 2020, and shall not include
revenues received by the City under Article 36 of the Business and Tax
Regulations Code adopted by the voters at the general municipal election on
November 3, 2020. The Controller shall treat General Fund appropriations to the
Housing Trust Fund as reductions in General Fund Discretionary Revenues when
calculating other funding allocations that are tied to General Fund
Discretionary Revenues, including funding allocations under Charter Sections
8A.105,
16.108, and
16.109. The Controller shall correct errors in the estimate of discretionary
revenues for a fiscal year through an adjustment to the next fiscal year's
estimate.
      (7)   In any year during the term of this Section, the City may, in its
discretion, reduce its annual contribution to the Housing Trust Fund for that
year by an amount equal to or less than 56.7% of the annual debt service
required to service any SB2113 Affordable Housing Bonds issued after January 1,
2013. "SB2113 Affordable Housing Bonds" are bonds issued by the City to support
the acquisition and creation of replacement affordable housing citywide using
property tax increment from former Redevelopment project areas under California
Health and Safety Code Section 33333.7
      (8)   The Controller shall set aside and maintain the amounts
appropriated to the Housing Trust Fund under this Section, together with any
interest earned thereon, and any amount unexpended or uncommitted at the end of
the fiscal year shall be carried forward to the next fiscal year and, subject
to the budgetary and fiscal limitations of this Charter, shall be appropriated
for the purposes specified in this Section.
   (d)   Uses of the Housing Trust Fund. The City may disburse monies from the
Housing Trust Fund through loans, grants or other types of payments, on terms
determined by the Mayor's Office of Housing in its sole discretion. Any
repayment of a loan or grant from the Fund that the City receives, or any
interest from a loan from the Fund that the City receives, will be returned to
the Housing Trust Fund. The City, acting through the Mayor's Office of Housing,
shall disburse the monies from the Housing Trust Fund for the following
eligible expenditures:
      (1)   The creation, acquisition, and rehabilitation of rental and
ownership housing affordable to Households earning up to 120% of the Area
Median Income, including, without limitation, the acquisition of land for such
purpose.
      (2)   No later than July 1, 2018, the City shall appropriate $15 million
from the Housing Trust Fund to a program that provides loans to Households
earning up to 120% of the Area Median Income and to Households including a
First Responder (subject to Area Median Income limits designated by the Mayor's
Office of Housing) for use as a down payment on the purchase of a housing unit
("the Down Payment Assistance Loan Program"). As soon as is practical, the
Mayor's Office of Housing shall develop and implement a manual for the Down
Payment Assistance Loan Program.
      (3)   No later than July 1, 2018, the City shall appropriate up to $15
million from the Housing Trust Fund to a program that provides funds to
Households earning up to 120% of Area Median Income for use as assistance to
reduce the risk to current occupants of a loss of housing and/or to help
current occupants make their homes safer, more accessible, more energy
efficient, and more sustainable (the "Housing Stabilization Program"). As soon
as is practical, the Mayor's Office of Housing shall implement and develop a
manual for the Housing Stabilization Program.
      (4)   The City may use monies in the Housing Trust Fund to operate and
administer the Infrastructure Grant Program as described in subsection (e). The
City may not allocate to the Infrastructure Grant Program in any fiscal year an
amount exceeding the greater of $2 million or 10% of the amount appropriated to
the Housing Trust Fund for that fiscal year under subsection (c).
      (5)   In any fiscal year, the City may allocate a sufficient amount from
the Housing Trust Fund to pay for all legally permissible administrative costs
of the Fund, including, without limitation, legal costs, associated with any
use of the Housing Trust Fund.
   (e)   Complete Neighborhoods Infrastructure Grant Program. After conferring
with the Director of Planning, the Director of the Mayor's Office of Housing
shall design and administer a Complete Neighborhoods Infrastructure Grant
Program ("Infrastructure Grant Program"). The purpose of the Infrastructure
Grant Program is to accelerate the build-out of the public realm infrastructure
needed to support increased residential density in the City's neighborhoods.
The City may use monies from the Infrastructure Grant Program only for public
facilities identified in the Community Facilities District law (Cal. Govt. Code
§§et seq., as amended), and shall give priority to the use of such monies by
residential development project sponsors, community-based organizations, and
City departments for public realm improvements associated with proposed
residential development projects.
   (f)   Bonding Authority. Notwithstanding the limitations set forth in
Sections
9.107,
9.108, and
9.109 of this Charter, upon recommendation of the Mayor, the Board of
Supervisors may authorize the issuance, without limitation, of revenue bonds,
lease financing, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness or other obligations
("Debt Obligations"), the proceeds of which are to be used for creating,
acquiring, and rehabilitating rental and ownership housing affordable to
Households earning up to 120% of the Area Median Income, including, without
limitation, the acquisition of land for such purpose. Such Debt Obligations
shall be secured by and/or repaid from any available funds pledged or
appropriated by Board of Supervisors ordinance for such purpose, which amount
may include funds in the Housing Trust Fund allocated under subsection (c).
Debt Obligations authorized hereby shall be issued in accordance with the
Mayor's Office of Housing policies, and upon the terms and conditions as the
Board of Supervisors shall approve. Funds appropriated to pay debt service on
the Debt Obligations in such fiscal year under the terms of this Section shall
be set aside in an account for such use until such payment is made.
   (g)   Legislation.
      (1)   The City may enact an ordinance adopting inclusionary or affordable
housing obligations, including definitions that differ from those set forth in
subsection (b) of this Section
16.110. After any such ordinance becomes effective, the City Attorney shall
cause to be removed from the Charter this subsection (g) of Section
16.110, and shall cause the subsequent subsections to be renumbered
accordingly. Thereafter, the City may by ordinance set and change the minimum
or maximum inclusionary or affordable housing obligations, and may adopt
definitions for inclusionary and affordable housing programs. In doing so, the
City shall endeavor to meet affordable housing needs across a broad range of
household incomes, family sizes and neighborhood conditions and may update the
method of fee calculation based on different building types and sizes, and may
set policies controlling conversion of rental units to ownership units, among
other programmatic changes.
      (2)   Until the City enacts an ordinance amending the Planning Code,
including but not limited to Section 415, adopting inclusionary or affordable
housing obligations different from those called for in previously existing
Charter subsections (g) and (h), the following requirements for inclusionary
housing shall apply during such interim period for any housing development
project that has not procured a final first discretionary development
entitlement approval, which shall include approval following any administrative
appeal to the relevant City board, or has not entered into a development
agreement or other binding agreement with the City as of January 12, 2016:
         (A)   For housing development projects consisting of ten dwelling
units or more, but less than twenty-five dwelling units, the requirements of
the Planning Code, including but not limited to Section 415 et seq., in effect
on the date this Charter Amendment is adopted
1  by the voters shall apply.
         (B)   For housing development projects consisting of twenty-five
dwelling units or more, the requirements of the Planning Code, including but
not limited to Section 415 et seq., in effect on the date this Charter
Amendment is adopted by the voters shall apply, except that the amounts of the
inclusionary housing requirement shall be modified as follows:
            (i)   Fee. The development project shall pay an affordable housing
fee equivalent to a requirement to provide 33% of the units in the principal
project as affordable units, using the method of fee calculation set forth in
Planning Code Section 415.5(b). In the event the City's Nexus Analysis in
support of the Inclusionary Affordable Housing program demonstrates that a
lower affordable housing fee is lawfully applicable based on an analysis of all
relevant impacts, the City may utilize the method of fee calculation supported
by the Nexus Analysis in lieu of the 33% requirement set forth herein.
            (ii)   On-Site Housing. If the project sponsor elects and is
eligible to construct units affordable to qualifying households on-site of the
principal project as set forth in Planning Code Section 415.5(g), the project
sponsor shall construct 25% of all units constructed on the project site as
affordable housing units, with 15% of the units affordable to low- and very
low-income households and 10% affordable to middle income households, and shall
comply with all otherwise applicable requirements of Section 415.6.
            (iii)   Off-Site Housing. If the project sponsor of a housing
development project elects and is eligible to provide units affordable to
qualifying households off-site of the principal project as set forth in
Planning Code Section 415.5(g), the project sponsor shall construct or cause to
be constructed affordable housing units equal to 33% of all units constructed
on the principal project site as affordable housing, with 20% of the units
affordable to low- and very low-income households and 13% of the units
affordable to middle-income households, and shall comply with all otherwise
applicable requirements of Section 415.7.
         (C)   Interim definitions of "Lower Income" and "Middle Income"
households. For purposes of the interim period before the City enacts an
ordinance amending the Planning Code, including but not limited to Section
415 et seq., "lower income" households shall be defined as households whose
total household income does not exceed 55% of Area Median Income for purposes
of renting an affordable unit, or 80% of Area Median Income for purposes of
purchasing an affordable unit, and "middle income" households shall mean
households whose total household income does not exceed 100% of Area Median
Income for purposes of renting an affordable unit, or 120% of Area Median
Income for purposes of purchasing an affordable unit.
   (j)
2    Disclaimer. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to limit or
restrict the ability of the City to adopt any fees or exactions related to
public benefits other than affordable housing, including, but not limited to,
transit infrastructure, streetscape, public realm improvement, or child care
fees.
   (k)
2    Term. Except as provided in subsection (l) below, this Section shall
become inoperative on July 1, 2043, and after such date shall have no further
force or effect and shall be repealed.
   (l)
2    Early Termination. At any time before January 1, 2013, the Mayor, after
consulting with his or her Budget Director and the Controller, and after taking
into account the City's projected revenues and expenditures in the City's
financial plans, may terminate implementation of this Section by issuing a
written notice to the Board of Supervisors and the Controller. The termination
shall be irrevocable and apply to the entire Section 16.110. Upon the Mayor's
signing of the notice, this Section shall become inoperative and after such
date shall have no force or effect and shall be repealed.
(Added by Proposition C, Approved 11/6/2012; amended by Proposition C, Approved
6/7/2016 Effective 7/29/2016; Proposition_F, Approved 11/3/2020)
(Former Sec. 16.110 repealed by Proposition A, Approved 11/6/2007)
SEC. 16.111. FRANCHISES.
   The Board of Supervisors shall have the power by ordinance to grant to any
person, firm or corporation, any franchise, including any renewal, extension,
transfer or amendment thereof, for the use of any public right-of- way or
public place within the boundaries of the City for the purpose of providing
services to customers. Franchises may be granted only by a competitive process.
Each franchise shall contain a specific and definite termination date which
shall not be more than 25 years after its first effective date.
SEC. 16.112. CITIZEN PARTICIPATION; PUBLIC NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ACCESS TO
PUBLIC DOCUMENTS.
   The publication of and full public access to public documents, except for
those subject to confidentiality, shall be as required by law.
   Notice shall be published in a timely manner before any public hearing, and
shall include a general description of said hearing.
   Notice shall be given, and public hearings held before:
   (a)   Any facility used by the public, including but not limited to
libraries and health facilities, shall be closed, eliminated, or its level of
services reduced, or prior to the leasing, selling or transfer of management of
said facility;
   (b)   Any significant change in the operating schedule or route of a street
railway, bus line, trolley bus line or cable car line is adopted;
   (c)   Any fee, schedule of rates, charges or fares which affects the public
is instituted or changed; should any such action be approved, the result shall
also be noticed; or
   (d)   Any amendment to the general plan, change in zoning or change in land
use is adopted.
   In addition, notice shall be given for the following:
   (e)   Any sale, lease, rental, encumbrance or exchange of real property held
by the City and County;
   (f)   Special assessment districts and protests of special assessment
districts;
   (g)   Requests for bids or proposals for the purchase or lease of materials,
supplies, equipment, services, construction, work or improvements involving
expenditure of $50,000 or more; notice shall also be given after any such award
is made; the Board may by ordinance reduce the dollar threshold for such
notice; and
   (h)   Polling places and precinct officers for any election.
SEC. 16.113. SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this Charter, or its application to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this Charter, and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be
affected.
SEC. 16.114. POWERS OF INQUIRY AND REVIEW.
   The Mayor, the City Administrator, the Controller, or any board or
commission appointed by the Mayor, relative solely to the affairs under its
control, may require such periodic or special reports of departmental costs,
operations and expenditures, examine the books, papers, records and accounts
of, and inquire into matters affecting the conduct of any department or office
of the City and County, and for that purpose may hold hearings, subpoena
witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books, papers,
testimony and other evidence. The Board of Supervisors shall have the same
powers of inquiry and review, including the power to issue subpoenas and compel
the production of evidence, with respect to matters affecting the conduct of
any department or office of the City and County.
SEC. 16.115. HEADING AND CAPTIONS.
   The headings and captions in this Charter shall have no bearing on the
meaning of the text, which shall be the exclusive source for interpretation and
construction.
SEC. 16.116. APPENDIX A – EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS.
   The following sections of the Charter of 1932, as amended, shall remain in
effect as a part of this Charter as "Appendix A Employment Provisions," except
that in instance of conflict or inconsistency between these sections of the
Charter of 1932 and the body of this Charter, this Charter shall prevail, and
subject to the following limitations and amendments:
   1.   All references to sections of "the Charter" or "this Charter" shall be
construed to refer to the Charter of 1932, as defined above;
   2.   All definitions or descriptions included through such references shall
remain in force, unless in conflict or inconsistent with definitions or
descriptions in this Charter, or unless amended by the Board of Supervisors;
and
   3.   Effective upon adoption of this Charter, references to "wife,"
"surviving spouse," "widow" or "widower" shall be construed to include
"spouse," or "surviving spouse."
   The following sections from the Charter of 1932, as amended, shall be
included in
Appendix A with full force and effect, and each shall be designated with a
prefix "A":
7.204             Contractors' Working Conditions
8.329             Certification of Eligibles
8.341             Removal or Discharge of Permanent, Non-Probationary Employees
8.342 - 8.344     Disciplinary Suspensions; Police and Fire Department
                  Suspensions; Exoneration of Charges
8.345 - 8.346     Disciplinary Action-Strikes
8.364             Catastrophic Sick Leave
8.400 - 8.406     Salaries and Wages for Teachers, Muni, Police, Fire and
                  Miscellaneous Employees
8.409 - 8.409-6   Collective Bargaining
8.410 - 8.411     Expenses
8.420 - 8.429     Health Service SystemBenefits
8.430 [1st ¶]    "Medical Care" Defined
8.431 - 8.432     Health Service System Benefits
8.440 - 8.441     Vacations
8.450 - 8.452     Hours and Tours of Duty
8.500 - 8.517     Retirement System
8.518 - 8.588-15  Retirement System
8.590-1 - 8.590-7 Collective Bargaining for Fire, Police and Airport Police
 
   The provisions of
Appendix A may be amended only pursuant to the provisions of state law
governing charter amendments.
SEC. 16.117. APPENDIX B – PORT AGREEMENTS.
   The following sections from the Charter of 1932, as amended, shall be
included in
Appendix B with full force and effect, and each shall be designated with a
prefix "B":
 
3.581 - 3.585 Port Transfer Agreement
6.406         Harbor Revenues and Expenditures
7.305         Revenue Bonds of the Port Commission
 
   The provisions of
Appendix B may be amended only pursuant to the provisions of state law
governing charter amendments.
SEC. 16.118. APPENDIX C – ETHICS PROVISIONS.
   The following sections of the Charter of 1932, as amended, shall be included
in
Appendix C with full force and effect, and each shall be designated with a
prefix "C":
 
3.699-10 - 3.699-16 Ethics Commission Procedures
 
   The provisions of
Appendix C may be amended only pursuant to the provisions of state law
governing charter amendments.
(Amended November 2003)
SEC. 16.119. APPENDIX D – BUILDING INSPECTION PROVISIONS.
   The following sections from the Charter of 1932, as amended, shall be
included in
Appendix D with full force and effect, and each shall be designated with a
prefix "D":
 
3.750 - 3.750-8 Department of Building Inspection
 
   The provisions of
Appendix D may be amended only pursuant to the provisions of state law
governing charter amendments.
SEC. 16.120. CUSTOMER SERVICE PLAN.
   Each department of the City and County shall adopt an annual Customer
Service Plan, in a format to be determined by the Board of Supervisors by
ordinance. The Board may excuse a department from particular requirements of
the ordinance where compliance would be inappropriate or impractical. Each
department shall file its Customer Service Plan with the Board of Supervisors
no later than February 1st of each year, along with a report on how the
department met the previous year's Plan, if any.
(Added November 1998)
SEC. 16.122. RIGHT TO VOTE ON ANY PROJECT THAT WOULD PLACE 100 ACRES OR MORE OF
FILL IN SAN FRANCISCO BAY.
   (a)   The qualified electors of the City and County shall have the right to
vote on any Project of the City and County that would place 100 acres or more
of fill in San Francisco Bay.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of the Charter, the approval
of any Project that would place 100 acres or more of fill in San Francisco Bay
shall be conditioned upon the affirmative vote of a majority vote of the
electorate.
   (c)   Within three (3) business days of such conditional approval by any
department, board, commission, or other unit of government of the City and
County, including any board, commission or other unit of government of the City
and County of San Francisco established by state or federal law that is subject
to the provisions of the San Francisco Charter, of any Project that would place
100 acres or more of fill in San Francisco Bay, the approving entity shall
provide written notice thereof to the Director of Elections who shall place the
measure required by this Section on the ballot at the first general municipal
or statewide election which occurs at least one hundred and twenty (120) days
after said notice is received by the Director.
   (d)   Ballot measures generated and placed on the ballot pursuant to this
Section are not exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act nor any
other federal, state or local environmental laws and regulations to which the
Project may be subject. Before any action is taken by the City and County to
approve a Project that is required by this Section to be submitted to the
electorate, the Project must comply with the California Environmental Quality
Act. If compliance requires the preparation, consideration and certification of
an Environmental Impact Report, that process shall be finalized prior to
project approval and the information contained in the final certified
Environmental Impact Report shall be made publicly available to the electorate
for its consideration prior to the election.
   (e)   The general statement of the ballot measure to be voted on, pursuant
to this Section, shall read as follows:
      Shall the voters approve (insert name of project) that would fill in
(insert number) acres of San Francisco Bay? Yes or No
      The name of the Project to be inserted into the general statement shall
be determined by the City Attorney pursuant to Section 510 of the San Francisco
Elections Code, or any subsequent amended or renumbered version of Section 510.
   (f)   Definitions. Words and phrases used in this Section shall have the
meanings specified in the San Francisco Charter, except that the following
words and phrases as used in this Section shall have the following meanings:
      "Project" or "Project of the City and County" shall mean any activity
proposed, sponsored, initiated, or funded by any department, board, commission,
or other unit of government of the City and County of San Francisco including
any board, commission or other unit of government of the City and County of San
Francisco established by state or federal law that is subject to provisions of
the San Francisco Charter.
      "Place fill" or "fill in" shall mean to introduce, or cause to be
introduced, earth or any other substance or material, including pilings or
structures placed on pilings, and structures floating at some or all times and
moored for extended periods.
   (g)   If any part or provision of this Section, or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Section,
including the application of such part or provision to other persons or
circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force
and effect. To this end, provisions of this Section are severable.
(Added November 2001)
SEC. 16.123. CIVILIAN POSITIONS WITHIN THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (a)   Positions in the Police Department may only be converted from sworn to
civilian as they become vacant. No sworn officer shall be laid off in order to
convert a position to civilian personnel.
   (b)   If the Mayor or any member of the Board of Supervisors proposes to
convert positions in the Police Department from sworn officers to civilian
personnel through the budget process, the Controller and the Chief of Police
shall report on whether the reduction would decrease the number of police
officers dedicated to neighborhood community policing, patrol, and
investigations or would substantially interfere with the delivery of City
public safety services, including services to protect the public in the event
of an emergency. In preparing the report required by this subsection (b), the
Chief of Police shall solicit input from the Police Commission.
(Added March 2004; amended by Proposition_E, Approved 11/3/2020)
[THE PUBLIC EDUCATION ENRICHMENT FUND AMENDMENT OF 2014]
SEC. 16.123-1. PUBLIC EDUCATION ENRICHMENT FUND; PREAMBLE.
   (a)   The people of the City and County of San Francisco find and declare
that:
      (1)   San Francisco Unified School District ("SFUSD") schools are one of
the City's most valuable public assets and every San Francisco student has the
right to a quality public education that prepares them to pursue higher
education, be competitive in a diversity of job markets, and ultimately
contribute to the future health and vitality of San Francisco;
      (2)   City funding for SFUSD public schools is an essential and valuable
investment in our youth, as validated by San Francisco voters who
overwhelmingly passed (by 71 percent) the ballot measure creating the Public
Education Enrichment Fund ("PEEF") in 2004;
      (3)   The State of California is currently 49th in per pupil spending,
and without the PEEF, SFUSD would fall to fifth place in per pupil spending
among comparable California school districts;
      (4)   Urban public schools have the greatest need for comprehensive
educational programs – including preschool programs, arts and music programs,
sports activities, and after school programs – but often have the fewest
resources to provide them;
      (5)   In the last decade, the PEEF enabled all San Francisco public
school students to benefit from once-underfunded and diminishing critical
programs and services including but not limited to: quality physical education
and athletics programs, fully functioning libraries at every school staffed by
credentialed librarians, arts and music teachers and programs, wellness and
behavioral support staffing and translation and interpretation services;
      (6)   In the last decade, critical PEEF funding for sports, libraries,
arts and music ensured that every San Francisco public school has a librarian,
all elementary schools offer art classes and engagement opportunities, physical
education courses are equipped and staffed by credentialed teachers, and sports
teams have more coaches and officials along with upgraded uniforms and
equipment;
      (7)   The Preschool for All program, initially established by the ballot
measure that adopted the PEEF in 2004, successfully served over 18,000 children
since the program's creation, with enrollment increasing year to year;
      (8)   Studies have shown that children who participated in Preschool for
All demonstrated significantly higher academic achievement than children who
did not participate;
      (9)   While the Preschool for All program made great strides in closing
the opportunity gap for low-income early age children, the current need far
exceeds the current level of services that the City is able to provide;
      (10)   The general education portion of the PEEF enabled SFUSD to triple
the number of students enrolled in grades K-8 receiving individual and/or group
health and mental health services through student support professionals over
the past five years, with the number of high school students receiving five or
more counseling sessions at the Wellness Center more than doubling in the last
10 years;
      (11)   The general education portion of the PEEF enabled SFUSD to nearly
double the number of high schools seniors completing two City College of San
Francisco courses;
      (12)   PEEF enabled the Human Capital Support program to recruit and
retain a diversity of quality teachers to SFUSD. In the year the program began,
there were approximately 46 teacher vacancies on the first day of school,
whereas there were only three teacher vacancies on the first day of school in
FY 2012-2013;
      (13)   SFUSD has seen a resurgence in enrollment in recent years and
recognition of the opportunities now available to the young people of San
Francisco;
      (14)   The choices businesses make about where to locate are impacted by
the quality of public services the City provides, including public safety,
transportation and education; a free quality public education can serve as a
key factor for businesses to attract and retain workers in our community;
      (15)   Since 2000, SFUSD has made strong improvements in achievement
measures and financial management; and during the past decade, SFUSD has built
an exemplary record for effective and responsible management of voter-approved
parcel taxes and bond measures. Financial and programmatic reviews of PEEF
expenditures conducted by the Controller's Office have verified that
expenditures were spent in accordance with SFUSD's spending plans and Charter
requirements; and
      (16)   As the economy begins to recover, now is the time to continue to
invest in our children's future to maintain and grow thriving public schools,
before declines begin to erode the progress the SFUSD has made.
   (b)   This measure may be referred to as "The Public Education Enrichment
Fund Amendment of 2014."
(Added March 2004; amended November 2014)
SEC. 16.123-2. PUBLIC EDUCATION ENRICHMENT FUND.
   (a)   Creating the Fund. There shall be a Public Education Enrichment Fund.
The City shall each year appropriate monies to the Public Education Enrichment
Fund according to subsections (b), (c), and (d), below.
   (b)   Baseline Appropriations. The Fund shall be used exclusively to
increase the aggregate City appropriations to and expenditures for the San
Francisco Unified School District. To this end, the City shall not reduce the
amount of such City appropriations (not including appropriations from the Fund
and exclusive of expenditures mandated by state or federal law) in any year
during which funds are required to be set aside under this Section
16.123-2 below the amount so appropriated for Fiscal Year 2002-2003 ("the base
year"). These baseline appropriations shall be separate from the City's annual
contributions to the Public Education Enrichment Fund under subsection (c), and
shall be appropriated by the City to the School District each year through and
including Fiscal Year 2040-2041.
      The amount of the City's baseline appropriations to the School District
shall be adjusted for each year after the base year by the Controller based on
calculations consistent from year to year by the percentage increase or
decrease in City and County discretionary General Fund revenues. In determining
City and County discretionary General Fund revenues, the Controller shall only
include revenues received by the City and County that are unrestricted and may
be used at the option of the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors for any lawful
City purpose. Additionally, in determining aggregate City and County
discretionary General Fund revenues, the Controller shall not include revenues
received by the City under the increased rates in Business and Tax Regulations
Code Sections 953.1(g), 953.2(h), 953.3(h), 953.4(e), 953.5(d), 953.6(f), 953.7
(d), and 953.8(i) adopted by the voters at the general municipal election on
November 3, 2020, and shall not include revenues received by the City under
Article 36 of the Business and Tax Regulations Code adopted by the voters at
the general municipal election on November 3, 2020. Errors in the Controller's
estimate of discretionary revenues for a fiscal year shall be corrected by an
adjustment in the next year's estimate. Using audited financial results for the
prior fiscal year, the Controller shall calculate and publish the actual amount
of City appropriations that would have been required under this baseline for
the School District.
   (c)   Annual Contributions to the Fund FY 2005-2006 through FY 2009-2010. In
addition to the annual baseline appropriation provided above, the City shall,
for years two through six of this measure, contribute the following amounts to
the Public Education Enrichment Fund:
      Fiscal Year 2005-06 $10 million
      Fiscal Year 2006-07 $20 million
      Fiscal Year 2007-08 $30 million
      Fiscal Year 2008-09 $45 million
      Fiscal Year 2009-10 $60 million
   (d)   Annual Contributions to the Fund – FY 2010-11 and Thereafter. For
Fiscal Years 2010-11 and thereafter, the City's annual contribution to the
Public Education Enrichment Fund shall equal its total contribution for the
prior year, beginning with Fiscal Year 2009-2010, adjusted for the estimated
increase or decrease in discretionary General Fund revenues for the year. In
determining the increase or decrease in discretionary General Fund revenues,
the Controller shall not include revenues received by the City under the
increased rates in Business and Tax Regulations Code Sections 953.1(g), 953.2
(h), 953.3(h), 953.4(e), 953.5(d), 953.6(f), 953.7(d), and 953.8(i) adopted by
the voters at the general municipal election on November 3, 2020, and shall not
include revenues received by the City under Article 36  of the Business and Tax
Regulations Code adopted by the voters at the general municipal election on
November 3, 2020.
   (e)   Audit Requirements. All disbursements from the Fund and from the
baseline appropriations shall be subject to periodic audit by the Controller.
The San Francisco Unified School District and the Office of Early Care and
Education, or any successor entity ("OECE") shall agree to such audits as a
condition of receiving disbursements from the Fund.
(Added March 2004; amended November 2014; Proposition_F, Approved 11/3/2020)
SEC. 16.123-3. ARTS, MUSIC, SPORTS, AND LIBRARY PROGRAMS.
   Each year during the term of this measure, the City shall appropriate one-
third of the money in the Public Education Enrichment Fund to the San Francisco
Unified School District for arts, music, sports, and library programs in the
schools.
(Added March 2004)
SEC. 16.123-4. UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO EARLY EDUCATION.
   (a)   Universal Access to Early Education. It shall be the goal of the City
and County of San Francisco to provide all children between the ages of three
and five years who are City residents the opportunity to attend quality early
education programs, giving priority to four year old children. It is the goal
of the people in adopting this measure to expand such access beginning no later
than September 1, 2015, building upon the work of the City's existing Preschool
for All program. This portion of the Fund may also be used to support the
development of services for children from birth to three years old.
   (b)   Planning Process. No later than January 1, 2016, the OECE, in
consultation with the San Francisco Child Care Planning and Advisory Council,
the First Five Commission, the San Francisco Unified School District, the San
Francisco Human Services Agency, the San Francisco Department of Children,
Youth and Their Families, and community stakeholders, shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors a proposal for expanding quality universal early education for
San Francisco. The Board of Supervisors shall approve the plan by resolution;
if the Board does not approve the plan, it may refer the plan back to the OECE
for revision.
      In preparing the plan, the OECE may consult with the First Five
Commission to develop universal early education funding guidelines consistent
with the findings of the 2012-2013 Child Care Planning and Advisory Council's
San Francisco Child Care Needs Assessment, the 2012 San Francisco Citywide Plan
for Early Education, First 5 San Francisco's 2013 Evaluations of the Preschool
for All program, the San Francisco Unified School District's 2014 Kindergarten
Readiness Data, and the Office of Early Care and Education's 2014 Financing
Study.
      The plan shall include goals for the quality of early care and education
programs, shall align with emerging developments in state and/or federal early
care and education policy, and shall address the professional development needs
of center-based and family child care providers. "Professional development" as
used in this Section
16.123-4 includes education, technical assistance and coaching, training, and
supports, and shall be aligned with the City's goals for early care and
education program quality. Additionally, in preparing the plan, the OECE shall
develop guidelines designed to meet neighborhood-specific needs, including
school readiness, subsidy availability, children's dual language development,
facility development, parent engagement and education, inclusion of children
with special needs, and provider support for both family child care homes and
child care centers. Such funding guidelines also shall address the unmet need
for universal early education and child care slots in specific City
neighborhoods.
      The plan shall also include an equity analysis of services and resources
for children and families. The OECE Citizens' Advisory Committee shall develop
a set of equity metrics to be used to compare existing services and resources
in low-income and disadvantaged communities with services and resources
available in the City as a whole.
      Following the Board of Supervisors' approval of the plan, the OECE, in
collaboration with the San Francisco Unified School District and First Five
Commission, shall develop an evaluation plan for tracking the results of the
City's investments in early care and education.
   (c)   Annual Disbursements. For Fiscal Year 2014-2015, the City shall
appropriate one-third of the money in the Public Education Enrichment Fund to
the First Five Commission for universal preschool programs administered by the
Commission. Beginning July 1, 2015, the City each year shall appropriate one-
third of the money in the Public Education Enrichment Fund to the OECE for
early education programs to be administered by that office or entity or its
successor.
   (d)   Citizens Advisory Committee. No later than March 1, 2015, the Board of
Supervisors shall establish, by ordinance, a Citizens Advisory Committee to
provide recommendations to the OECE on universal access to early education and
the funds appropriated under this Section.
(Added March 2004; amended November 2014)
SEC. 16.123-5. DIRECT FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR THE SAN FRANCISCO UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT.
   (a)   Annual Disbursements. Each year through and including Fiscal Year
2040-2041, the City shall appropriate one-third of the money in the Public
Education Enrichment Fund to the San Francisco Unified School District as
direct financial support.
   (b)   Permissible Uses. The San Francisco Unified School District may expend
funds provided as direct financial support under this Section for any
educational or support purpose provided under law, including, but not limited
to, gifted and talented programs, magnet programs, literacy programs, dual-
language immersion programs, special education, employee compensation, career
and college centers at high schools, teacher mentoring or master teacher
programs, or other instructional purposes. The City recognizes that in
providing such programs and services, a well-run school district requires both
certificated and classified staff, and urges the San Francisco Unified School
District to hire both certificated and classified staff to carry out the
purposes of this measure.
(Added March 2004; amended November 2014)
SEC. 16.123-6. EXPENDITURE PLANS.
   (a)   No later than April 1 of each year during the term of this measure,
the San Francisco Unified School District and the OECE shall each submit an
expenditure plan for funding to be received from the Public Education
Enrichment Fund for the upcoming fiscal year to the Mayor and the Board of
Supervisors, in response to the Controller's March fund estimate for the coming
fiscal year.
   (b)   The plans shall include a budget for the expenditures, descriptions of
programs and services, performance goals, target populations, hiring and
recruitment plans for personnel, plans for matching or other additional
funding, operating reserves, and any other matters that the District and the
OECE deem appropriate or the Mayor or the Board requests.
   (c)   The Mayor and the Board of Supervisors may request further explanation
of items included in the plans, and the District and the OECE shall respond in
a timely manner to such inquiries. The Board may place appropriations provided
for under this measure on reserve until it has received adequate responses to
its inquiries.
(Added March 2004; amended November 2014)
SEC. 16.123-8. ADJUSTMENTS.
   (a)   Audit Recommendations. The Mayor and the Board of Supervisors may
suspend the City's disbursements from the baseline appropriations or the Public
Education Enrichment Fund under Sections
16.123-3,
16.123-4, or
16.123-5 in whole or in part for any year where the Controller certifies that
the San Francisco Unified School District or the OECE has failed to adopt audit
recommendations made by the Controller.
      As part of the audit function, the Controller shall periodically review
performance and cost benchmarks developed by the School District and the OECE,
including:
      (1)   Fund dollars spent for services, materials, and supplies permitted
under the Charter;
      (2)   Fund dollars spent as reported to the City;
      (3)   Supporting documentation of Fund expenditures; and,
      (4)   Progress towards established workload, efficiency and effectiveness
measures.
   (b)   Reserve Policies. The Mayor and the Board of Supervisors may suspend
the City's disbursements from the baseline appropriations or the Public
Education Enrichment Fund under Sections
16.123-2,
16.123-4, or
16.123-5 in whole or in part for any year where the Controller certifies that
the San Francisco Unified School District or the OECE has failed to adopt
reserve policies recommended by the Controller.
   (c)   Transfer and Use of Suspended Distributions. If the Mayor and the
Board of Supervisors suspend City distributions from the baseline
appropriations or the Public Education Enrichment Fund under subsections (a) or
(b), the City shall transfer the amount that would otherwise be distributed
from the baseline appropriations or the Public Education Enrichment Fund for
that year to the Children and Youth Fund established in Charter Section
16.108, or any successor legislation, for the provision of substantially
equivalent services and programs.
   (d)   New Local Revenues. The Board of Supervisors may, by ordinance,
proportionally reduce the contribution to the Public Education Enrichment Fund
and the disbursements to the San Francisco Unified School District and the OECE
required by Sections
16.123-1 through
16.123-10 if the voters of San Francisco adopt new, dedicated revenue sources
for the School District or the OECE, and the offsetting reduction in
disbursements is specifically authorized by the local revenue measure.
   (e)   New State Revenues. Following full implementation of the per-student
funding targets outlined for SFUSD in the State's Local Control Funding Formula
("LCFF"), as adopted in 2013, the Board of Supervisors may, by ordinance,
proportionally reduce the contribution to the Public Education Enrichment Fund
and the disbursements to the San Francisco Unified School District required by
this measure if the percentage increase in per-pupil LCFF funding provided by
the State of California to the San Francisco Unified School District in any
subsequent fiscal year exceeds the percentage increase in the City's cost of
living during the previous fiscal year.
      The Board of Supervisors may, by ordinance, proportionally reduce the
contribution to the Public Education Enrichment Fund and the disbursements to
the OECE if the State of California provides funding to the City for universal
preschool, provided that such disbursements are not required to match state
and/or other funding.
(Added March 2004; amended November 2014)
SEC. 16.123-9. STATE REDISTRIBUTION OF LOCAL EDUCATION REVENUES.
   (a)   The people of the City and County of San Francisco find and declare
that major urban school districts, such as San Francisco, serve an ethnically
and economically diverse student population that requires more resources than
currently provided under state guidelines. In adopting this measure, the people
of San Francisco choose to provide additional City resources to complement, and
not supplant, state funding for the San Francisco Unified School District.
   (b)   Consistent with subsection (a), the people of the City and County of
San Francisco specifically find that their contributions to and disbursements
from the baseline appropriations and the Public Education Enrichment Fund are
discretionary expenditures by the City for the direct benefit of the children
of San Francisco, their families, and the community at large. In the event that
the State attempts, directly or indirectly, to redistribute these expenditures
to other jurisdictions or to offset or reduce State funding to the School
District because of these expenditures, the City shall transfer said monies
that would otherwise be distributed to the School District each year to the
City's Children's Fund established in Charter Section
16.108, for the provision of substantially equivalent services and programs.
(Added March 2004)
SEC. 16.123-10. SUNSET.
   The provisions of Sections
16.123-1 through
16.123-10 shall expire at the end of Fiscal Year 2040-2041, unless extended by
the voters.
(Added March 2004; amended November 2014)
SEC. 16.124. BOARD OF SUPERVISORS AUTHORIZED TO RESPOND TO CERTAIN ORDERS OR
REQUESTS FOR THE PRODUCTION OF CITY RECORDS.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors may, by resolution, designate as a "watch
law" any state or federal law or regulation that calls for, authorizes, or
requires the production by any City officer, employee, agency, department or
office of information, records, or other tangible things held by the City, the
disclosure of which could violate the rights of any individuals under the State
or Federal Constitutions.
   (b)   The Board of Supervisors may provide, by ordinance, that it shall
respond on behalf of the City and County of San Francisco to all orders or
requests for the production of information, records or other tangible things
served on the City and County under any law designated as a watch law.
   (c)   The Board may adopt procedures for expedited consideration of orders
or requests for production where necessary to comply with legal deadlines for
responding. Prior to acting by resolution of the full Board of Supervisors, the
Board may refer the order or request to a committee of its members for a
recommendation to the full Board, after consultation with the City Attorney, on
an appropriate course of action. To the extent federal or state law would
prohibit public disclosure of information that the Board of Supervisors needs
to discuss in order to discharge its powers under this Section, the Board may
meet in closed session for the limited purpose of discussing that information.
(Added March 2004)
SEC. 16.125. DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP.
   The Board of Supervisors may, by a vote of three-fourths of its members,
amend or repeal the voter approved Domestic Partnership Ordinance, as codified
in Chapter 62 of the San Francisco Administrative Code, as it deems necessary
(1) to eliminate any residency requirement for establishing a Domestic
Partnership by filing with the County Clerk, (2) to recognize domestic
partnerships formed in other jurisdictions to the same extent as marriages
formed in other jurisdictions, and (3) to afford domestic partners, to the
fullest extent legally possible, the same rights, benefits, responsibilities,
obligations and duties as spouses.
(Added March 2004)
[OUR CHILDREN, OUR FAMILIES COUNCIL]
SEC. 16.127-1. OUR CHILDREN, OUR FAMILIES COUNCIL; PREAMBLE.
   (a)   San Francisco has historically shown great concern and compassion for
its most vulnerable residents – its children. The City and the community have
demonstrated this commitment through the adoption of progressive, innovative
and creative ideals supporting the well-being of San Francisco's children and
families.
   (b)   To continue its legacy as a champion of children, it is imperative for
San Francisco to further invest in the City's children and families.
   (c)   The people of the City and County of San Francisco previously
supported the passage of the unprecedented Children's Amendment in 1991 and
2000 and the Public Education Enrichment Fund in 2004. While these initiatives
dedicated funding to services, the level of unmet needs in providing critical
programming and services still falls short.
   (d)   In order to advance a Citywide vision and long-term set of goals, City
leaders, departments, the San Francisco Unified School District ("SFUSD"), and
community partners must come together to align needs with services, coordinate
across agencies, and develop a strategy.
   (e)   The Our Children, Our Families Council, comprised of department heads
from the City and SFUSD, and community stakeholders, will build a platform that
will place children and families at the center of every policy decision.
   (f)   With the renewal of the Children and Youth Fund and the Public
Education Enrichment Fund in November 2014, the City must seize this
opportunity to develop a long-term Citywide vision, create a set of strategies,
coordinate services, and identify shared goals to not only ensure that all
children and families already here are able to thrive, but to encourage other
families to live here.
   (g)   The percentage of children under the age of 18 in San Francisco has
steadily declined. As of 2010, 13.4 percent of the City's total population was
under the age of 18, the lowest percentage of any major city nationwide.
   (h)   Families continue to leave San Francisco, especially those families in
the low to moderate income brackets.
   (i)   San Francisco's children population is declining, with over 10 percent
of 1 to 4 year olds moving out of the City annually and fewer children moving
in.
   (j)   The declining numbers of children and families in the City cost the
community financially as less money is spent on the local economy.
   (k)   This measure will put in place a collaborative approach around the
following points of unity:
      (1)   Ensuring equity, and giving priority to children and youth with the
highest needs;
      (2)   Empowering parents, youth, and community stakeholders by giving
them a voice in the implementation of this Citywide vision; and,
      (3)   Building public trust through transparency and accountability
meeting the needs of children and families.
(Added November 2014)
SEC. 16.127-2. OUR CHILDREN, OUR FAMILIES COUNCIL; CREATION.
   There shall be an Our Children, Our Families Council ("the Council") to
advise the City on the unmet needs, services, and basic needs infrastructure of
children and families in San Francisco through the creation of a Children and
Families Plan for the City.
(Added November 2014)
SEC. 16.127-3. OUR CHILDREN, OUR FAMILIES COUNCIL; PURPOSE.
   In order to advance a Citywide vision centered on the needs of children and
families, City leaders and departments, SFUSD, and community partners must come
together to coordinate their efforts across agencies and develop a strategy for
achieving shared goals. The purpose of the Children and Families Plan to be
developed by the Council will be to create an aligned and connected system of
programs and services, in order to strengthen the City's ability to best serve
children, youth and their families, with the specific goals of promoting
coordination among and increased accessibility to such programs and services,
and enhancing their overall effectiveness.
(Added November 2014)
SEC. 16.127-4. OUR CHILDREN, OUR FAMILIES COUNCIL; COMPOSITION.
   The Mayor shall chair the Council, and shall invite the Superintendent of
SFUSD to serve as co-chair of the Council. Other members of the Council shall
include the heads of City departments with responsibilities for services to
children and families, members of the community, and stakeholders. The Mayor
shall also invite the heads of SFUSD divisions identified by the Superintendent
to serve as members of the Council.
(Added November 2014)
SEC. 16.127-5. OUR CHILDREN, OUR FAMILIES COUNCIL; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (a)   In order to ensure that all children in every neighborhood, especially
those neighborhoods with the greatest needs, have access to the resources to
achieve, the Council will be responsible for developing a Citywide vision,
Citywide shared priorities, Citywide program goals, and Citywide best practices
for addressing those needs.
   (b)   The San Francisco Children and Families Plan. The Council shall craft
a San Francisco Children and Families Plan ("the Plan") and identify relevant
goals and strategies to align and coordinate the services to children and
families provided by City departments, SFUSD, and community partners and to
maximize support for children and families. The Plan shall consider the
following elements:
      (1)   Ease of access for children, youth and families in receiving
services;
      (2)   Educational milestones developed by SFUSD and youth development
milestones developed by the Department of Children, Youth, and Their Families
("DCYF") and the Council;
      (3)   Existing quality of service benchmarks established by City and
SFUSD departments;
      (4)   Framework for a basic needs infrastructure, including, but not
limited to, housing, transit, and job placement resources; and
      (5)   Fairness in prioritizing the delivery of services to the children
and families with the most need.
      The Plan shall also include an equity analysis of services and resources
for children, youth, and families. The Council shall develop a set of equity
metrics to be used to compare existing services and resources in low-income and
disadvantaged communities with services and resources available in the City as
a whole. The Council may draw upon metrics used by departments including DCYF
and the Office of Early Care and Education (or any successor agency).
   (c)   No later than May 1, 2016, and every fifth year thereafter, the
Council shall develop and adopt a set of proposed Citywide outcomes for
services to children and families, including an outcomes framework responsive
to the evolving needs of the community. No later than July 1, 2016, and every
fifth year thereafter, the Council shall prepare and adopt a Children and
Families Plan for the City, which shall include a comprehensive assessment of
City policies and programs, both public and private, addressing the needs of
children and families in San Francisco, and policy-level recommendations for
making the City more supportive of children and families. The Council shall
emphasize solicitation and incorporation of community input in the development
of the initial Plan and subsequent Plans.
   (d)   No later than October 1, 2017, and each year thereafter, the Board of
Supervisors shall conduct a noticed public hearing to review the Council's
performance and the City's overall progress under the current Plan and to
update interested parties on the status of the next Plan.
   (e)   All City Departments shall consider the Plan in developing their own
strategic plans to make the City more supportive of children and families.
   (f)   Planning. Following the adoption of implementing legislation under
Section 16.126-7
1 , the Mayor shall appoint members to the Council and the Council shall
convene to make initial decisions regarding staffing, organization, and
implementation. The Council shall also begin planning for the start of the
five-year planning cycle in Fiscal Year 2016-2017. The Council may recommend,
and the Board of Supervisors may approve by ordinance, changes to the due dates
and timelines provided in this Section
16.127-5.
   (g)   Coordination of Stakeholders. The Council shall ensure that various
community groups, agencies, and organizations responsible for providing
support, including the City, SFUSD, and community partners, work together in
aligned, coherent, and effective ways.
   (h)   Coordination of Departments. The Council shall facilitate cooperation
and coordination between relevant departments of the City and SFUSD to maximize
alignment and improve outcomes for children and youth. The Council shall
oversee development and implementation of a data-sharing agreement between
SFUSD and relevant City departments. The Council, in cooperation with the Board
of Supervisors, the San Francisco Board of Education, and community groups,
shall work to ensure that funds spent to benefit children and families are
targeted to those most in need of specific services and that the funds are used
strategically to leverage and complement existing and anticipated federal,
state, and local resources.
   (i)   Continued Autonomy of City and SFUSD. The Council will be a policy
coordinating body dedicated to improving coordination between the City and its
departments, SFUSD and its departments, and community-based organizations
funded by those agencies. While the Council will make recommendations to the
City and SFUSD, the City and SFUSD will each retain its full independence and
authority regarding programmatic and funding decisions.
   (j)   Evaluation. Every five years, the Controller shall review the
Council's operations and the Plan. The Controller shall submit the results of
the review to the Council, the Board of Supervisors, and the Board of
Education. The Council shall consider the results of the Controller's review in
the preparation of the next Plan. The Council shall also report to the general
public on the Council's efforts and achievements through the creation of an
annual San Francisco Children and Families First Progress Report. The Progress
Report shall provide the results of the efforts of the City, SFUSD, and the
community to serve children and families under the Plan, measured against
quantifiable standards and metrics and in light of the Council's previously-
adopted goals and priorities.
(Added November 2014)
CODIFICATION NOTE
1.   So in Proposition C, approved November, 2014.
SEC. 16.127-6. OUR CHILDREN, OUR FAMILIES COUNCIL; STAFFING.
   (a)   Staffing Support. Subject to the fiscal and budgetary provisions of
the Charter, the City shall provide staff to the Council ("Council Staff") for
administrative, organizational, policy, and research support. Funding for
Council Staff shall come from the General Fund; provided, however, that SFUSD,
participating City departments, and members of the public may provide
additional support and contributions.
   (b)   Staff Roles and Responsibilities. Subject to the direction of the
Council, Council Staff shall:
      (1)   Provide administrative, organizational, policy, planning, and
research support to the Council and its outcomes framework;
      (2)   Engage department heads from the City and SFUSD to coordinate the
implementation of services;
      (3)   Provide support for the Council, including developing a joint data-
sharing agreement between the City and SFUSD, monitoring the planning cycle,
providing technical support, and developing policy briefs on key issues
relevant to implementation of the Plan;
      (4)   Support the development of an inventory of all Citywide services
for children and youth, including state and federally funded programs; and,
      (5)   Support the development of the Children and Families First Progress
Report.
   (c)   Funding. It shall be the policy of the City to provide sufficient
funding and administrative support for the Council and Council Staff to perform
these functions. Funding for administrative support for the Council shall come
from the General Fund; provided, however, that SFUSD, participating City
departments, and members of the public may provide additional support and
contributions.
(Added November 2014)
SEC. 16.127-7. OUR CHILDREN, OUR FAMILIES COUNCIL; IMPLEMENTATION.
   The Board of Supervisors shall further provide by ordinance for the
membership, structure, functions and support of the Council, consistent with
the provisions of Sections 16.126-1 through 16.126-6
1 .
(Added November 2014)
CODIFICATION NOTE
1.   So in Proposition C, approved November, 2014.
[DIGNITY FUND]
SEC. 16.128-1. DIGNITY FUND; PREAMBLE.
   (a)   There is hereby established a fund, which shall be called the Dignity
Fund (“Fund”), to be administered by the Department of Disability and Aging
Services (“DAAS”), or any successor agency. Monies in the Fund shall be used or
expended by DAAS, subject to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of the
Charter, solely to help Seniors and Adults with Disabilities secure and utilize
the services and support necessary to age with dignity in their own homes and
communities. For purposes of Section
16.128-1 through
16.128-12, “Senior” shall mean a person 60 years old or older, and “Adult with
a Disability” shall mean a person 18 years old or older with a disability as
defined under the Americans With Disabilities Act.
   (b)   The Dignity Fund is needed to ensure the health and well-being of
Seniors and Adults with Disabilities for the following reasons:
      (1)   DAAS and the San Francisco Long Term Care Coordinating Council have
advanced a vision and set of long-term goals that highlight best practices,
strengthen access to services, coordinate across agencies and City departments,
and develop a unified strategy.
      (2)   Important safety net services to Seniors and Adults with
Disabilities such as adult day programs and/or other state-funded services
directed to low-income populations have suffered significant losses in funding
due in part to the reorganization of California’s health and long-term care
services.
      (3)   San Francisco non-profit community based organizations are the
City’s most valuable public assets in terms of supporting Seniors and Adults
with Disabilities to age with dignity in their own homes and communities.
      (4)   Seniors and Adults with Disabilities are valuable contributors to
the City’s vitality and must stay connected to friends and family who can help
them age in place with dignity.
      (5)   Because a majority of the City’s Seniors and Adults with
Disabilities live on fixed incomes, the growing economic divisions in the City
are putting them increasingly at risk of poor health outcomes and
institutionalization.
      (6)   San Francisco has the highest percentage of Seniors and Adults with
Disabilities of any urban area in California and the number of Seniors
continues to steadily increase, especially for those over the age of 85. Over
40% live alone with inadequate support networks, in part because their families
have been forced to seek more affordable housing or employment elsewhere, or
because they have no children or they lack supportive families.
      (7)   The constant increase in economic pressure and lack of support for
Seniors and Adults with Disabilities has impacted the cultural and ethnic
diversity of the City.
      (8)   As of 2015, over 19,200 people 55 years of age and older were
living in San Francisco with Alzheimer’s disease or dementia. This number is
projected to increase to 26,868 by 2030 – a 40% increase in 15 years.
      (9)   Over 70% of veterans in the City are over the age of 55 and 28% of
those have disabilities. As of 2015, 40% of all veterans rely on Veterans
Administration health care with the remainder reliant on outside agencies to
provide care, representing a massive undertaking by community based
organizations.
      (10)   As of 2015, approximately 60% of people with HIV in San Francisco
were over 50 years old. In 2020, it is estimated, 70% of people with HIV in San
Francisco will be over 50 years old.
      (11)   In 2013, the Insight Center determined that a single person 65
years of age or older needed a monthly income of $2,526 to rent housing and
meet his or her basic needs in San Francisco. At that time, the fair market
rent for a one-bedroom apartment was $1,500 a month and 62% of all Seniors
could not afford that rent. As of 2016, the fair market monthly rent for the
same apartment is $1,635. Many apartments have higher rents. The median rent
for a one bedroom apartment in San Francisco is now approximately $3,600 per
month.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016; Amended by Proposition_B, Approved
11/5/2019)
SEC. 16.128-2. GOALS OF THE DIGNITY FUND.
   The goals of expenditures from the Fund and the planning process created in
Charter Sections
16.128-1 through
16.128-12, shall be:
   (a)   To ensure that San Francisco’s Seniors and Adults with Disabilities
are provided the opportunity to age with dignity and with affordable, quality
services and support.
   (b)   To ensure San Francisco is an aging- and disability-friendly city,
helping individuals age with dignity in communities as an important part of the
City population and civic culture.
   (c)   To focus on the prevention of problems and on supporting and enhancing
the strengths of older adults, people with disabilities, and their hands-on
care providers.
   (d)   To complement the City’s housing and community development efforts by
providing needed long-term services and support in housing to keep individuals
in their homes and communities.
   (e)   To strengthen a community-based network of services and support in all
neighborhoods.
   (f)   To ensure that Seniors and Adults with Disabilities receive maximum
benefit from the Fund and that equity is a guiding principle of the funding
process.
   (g)   To distribute funds based on best practices, the highest need, and
successful and innovative models in order to ensure maximum impact.
   (h)   To the maximum extent feasible, to distribute funds equitably among
services for all eligible groups, regardless of race, ethnicity, sexual
orientation, or gender identity or other identifying characteristics.
   (i)   To ensure Seniors and Adults with Disabilities are provided with
gender responsive and culturally competent services.
   (j)   To strengthen collaboration around shared and agreed upon outcomes
among service providers for Seniors and Adults with Disabilities and their
hands-on care providers, including collaboration among public agencies and non-
profit organizations.
   (k)   To fill gaps in services.
   (l)   To leverage other resources whenever feasible.
   (m)   To support programs that prioritize:
      (1)   Stabilizing people, through food, homecare, transportation, and
case management services;
      (2)   Stabilizing housing to permit people to age in place successfully,
through eviction protection, housing preservation, and accessibility
improvements to existing housing;
      (3)   Preventive health care and healthy aging;
      (4)   Supporting transitions to the best home and community care and
support, through ombudsman services, transitional care programs, and navigation
assistance; and
      (5)   Caregiver support.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016)
SEC. 16.128-3. ANNUAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE FUND.
   (a)   Annual Baseline Contributions to the Fund. Each year during the term
of Charter Section
16.128-1 et seq., the City shall make an annual baseline contribution to the
Fund in the amount of $38 million, representing the amount the City spent in
fiscal year 2016-2017 to provide eligible services as identified in Section
16.128-4 to Seniors and Adults with Disabilities.
   (b)   Additional Contributions for FY 2017-2018 through FY 2026-2027. For
fiscal year 2017-2018, the City shall increase its contribution to the Fund
over the baseline amount in subsection (a) by $6 million. For each fiscal year
from 2018-2019 through 2026-2027, the City shall increase its additional
contribution to the Fund under this subsection (b) by $3 million over the prior
year.
   (c)   Projected Budget Deficits. Notwithstanding the provisions of
subsection (b), the City may freeze the City’s annual contribution to the Fund
for any fiscal year 2017-2018 through 2026-2027 at the then-current amount when
the City’s projected budget deficit for the upcoming fiscal year at the time of
the Joint Report or Update to the Five Year Financial Plan as prepared jointly
by the Controller, the Mayor’s Budget Director, and the Board of Supervisors’
Budget Analyst exceeds $200 million, adjusted annually beginning with fiscal
year 2017-2018 by the percentage increase or decrease in aggregate City
discretionary revenues, as determined by the Controller, based on calculations
consistent from year to year. In determining aggregate City discretionary
revenues, the Controller shall only include revenues received by the City that
are unrestricted and may be used at the option of the Mayor and the Board of
Supervisors for any lawful City purpose.
   (d)   Additional Contributions for FY 2027-2028 through FY 2036-2037. For
fiscal years 2027-28 through 2036-2037, the City’s annual contribution to the
Fund shall equal its total contribution, including the baseline amount under
subsection (a), for the prior year, beginning with Fiscal Year 2026-2027,
adjusted by the percentage increase or decrease in aggregate City discretionary
revenues, as determined by the Controller, based on calculations consistent
from year to year. In determining aggregate City discretionary revenues, the
Controller shall not include revenues received by the City under the increased
rates in Business and Tax Regulations Code Sections 953.1(g), 953.2(h), 953.3
(h), 953.4(e), 953.5(d), 953.6(f), 953.7(d), and 953.8(i) adopted by the voters
at the general municipal election on November 3, 2020, and shall not include
revenues received by the City under Article 36  of the Business and Tax
Regulations Code adopted by the voters at the general municipal election on
November 3, 2020. For purposes of this subsection (d), the “additional
contribution” for these years shall mean the amount in excess of the baseline
amount.
   (e)   The City may in any year contribute more to the Fund than the amounts
required under subsections (a) through (d), but those increases shall not alter
or affect the amounts of the City’s required contributions for subsequent
years.
   (f)   The Controller shall maintain the Fund separate and apart from all
other City funds. Any amount in the Fund unspent or uncommitted at the end of
the fiscal year shall be carried forward to the next fiscal year and, subject
to the budgetary and fiscal limitations of this Charter, shall be appropriated
then or thereafter for the services and purposes specified in Section
16.128-4.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016; amended by Proposition_F, Approved
11/3/2020)
SEC. 16.128-4. ELIGIBLE SERVICES.
   The City shall only use monies from the Fund for the following categories of
services and purposes, to benefit Seniors and Adults with Disabilities:
   (a)   Home and Community Based Long Term Care and Support: Home care, adult
day health care, adult social day care, IHSS emergency homecare, short term
interim housing options, housing stabilization and support services, respite
care, transitional housing for those leaving institutional care, related
transportation (not already mandated or funded), accessible transportation
programs, and other similar services funded through the City’s Disability and
Aging Services Community Living Fund, or any successor legislation.
   (b)   Food and Nutrition Programs: Nutrition programs, including group
meals, home-delivered meals, home-delivered groceries, food stamps outreach,
and related education and outreach programs such as chronic disease self-
management programs.
   (c)   Consumer and Caregiver Education, Empowerment, and Support: Programs
including computers and digital learning, peer support programs, employment and
training programs not otherwise mandated, senior companions, information and
assistance programs, health insurance counseling and advocacy counseling,
service connection programs, including resource centers supporting those with
Alzheimer’s disease and dementia, and family caregiver support programs.
   (d)   Senior/Disabled Community and Service Centers: Programs including
senior centers, neighborhood-based village projects and similar programs, case
management and care coordination, housing-based service connection programs,
and other community-building activities that lead to more aging- and
disability-friendly neighborhoods.
   (e)   Empowerment, Self-Advocacy and Legal Services Programs: Programs
including benefits counseling and advocacy, eviction prevention, housing
advocacy, long term care consumer rights, ombudsman programs, naturalization
services, legal services and support, and IHSS/Supplemental Security Income
(“SSI”)/Medi-Cal advocacy, including strengthening share of cost options.
   (f)   Health and Wellness Promotion: Programs including abuse and fraud
prevention, grief counseling and suicide prevention, telephone reassurance,
medication management, money management, and behavioral health not otherwise
funded or mandated, health promotion and screening, and other activities that
promote well-being and decrease social isolation.
   (g)   Targeted Services: Outreach, planning and targeted services and
support to LGBT seniors, veterans, ethnic communities, people with disabilities
and chronic conditions, their caregivers and other high-need groups as strong
and integrated components of the service categories above.
   (h)   Funding for the Department of Disability and Aging Services to staff
the Oversight and Advisory Committee created in Section
16.128-11 (“Oversight and Advisory Committee”), and to support planning and
evaluation processes, and facilitate funding allocation;
   (i)   Administration of the Fund and evaluation of Fund goals and services;
   (j)   Technical assistance and capacity-building for service providers and
community-based partners; and,
   (k)   Services that supplement, expand, or enhance existing programs for
Seniors or Adults with Disabilities.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016; Amended by Proposition_B, Approved
11/5/2019)
SEC. 16.128-5. EXCLUDED SERVICES.
   Notwithstanding Section
16.128-4, services paid for by the Fund shall not include:
   (a)   Services provided by the Police Department or other law enforcement
agencies, courts, the District Attorney, Public Defender, City Attorney, the
Fire Department, and detention or probation services mandated by state or
federal law;
   (b)   Any service that benefits Seniors or Adults with Disabilities
incidentally or only as members of a larger population of adults;
   (c)   Any service realigned by the State or for which a fixed or minimum
level of expenditure is mandated and funded by state or federal law, to the
extent of the level of funding provided;
   (d)   Acquisition of any capital item unless for the primary and direct use
by Seniors and Adults with Disabilities and that is necessary for the expansion
of services and support;
   (e)   Acquisition, other than by lease for a term of ten years or less, of
any real property or land, or capital expenditures, or predevelopment or
construction costs for housing;
   (f)   Maintenance, utilities, or any similar operating costs of any facility
not used primarily and directly by Seniors and Adults with Disabilities or of
any recreation or park facility, library, hospital, or housing;
   (g)   Medical health services, other than prevention, education, and
behavioral and mental health support services; or
   (h)   Services provided by hospitals and long-term care institutions.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016)
SEC. 16.128-6. PLANNING CYCLE.
   (a)   The City shall appropriate the additional contributions to the Fund
under Section
16.128-3(b) and (d) according to a four-year planning process. This process is
intended to: (1) increase transparency, accountability, and public engagement;
(2) provide time and opportunities for community participation and planning;
(3) ensure program stability; and (4) maximize the effectiveness of the
services funded.
   (b)   Year 1 – Community Needs Assessment. Beginning in fiscal year 2017-
2018 and during every fourth fiscal year thereafter, DAAS shall conduct a
Community Needs Assessment (CNA) to identify services to receive monies from
the Fund. The CNA shall include qualitative and quantitative data sets
collected through interviews, focus groups, surveys, or other outreach
mechanisms to determine service gaps and unmet needs. In conducting the CNA,
DAAS shall also review needs assessments prepared by community and other
governmental entities. Subject to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of the
Charter, DAAS may contract with consultants and outside experts for such
services as it may require to prepare the CNA. DAAS shall undertake a robust
community process to solicit input from Seniors and Adults with Disabilities,
in consultation with the Mayor’s Office on Disability or any successor agency.
      DAAS shall, in consultation with the Oversight and Advisory Committee,
develop a plan for how to conduct the CNA with the Oversight and Advisory
Committee. The CNA shall include a gap analysis comparing actual performance
with potential or desired performance and an equity analysis of services and
resources for Seniors, Adults with Disabilities, and their caregivers.
      DAAS shall develop a set of equity metrics to be used to establish a
baseline of existing services and resources for Seniors and Adults with
Disabilities in low-income neighborhoods and disadvantaged communities,
compared to services and resources available in the City as a whole. This
equity analysis shall include an examination of eligibility for existing
programs and will seek to provide more services and support for those low and
modest income residents who are not currently eligible for assistance with home
and community-based services.
      The outreach for the CNA shall create opportunities for a robust cross-
section of stakeholders, including Seniors, Adults with Disabilities, their
caregivers, nonprofit agencies, and other members of the public, to provide
input. By September 1, DAAS shall provide its plan for conducting the CNA to
the Oversight and Advisory Committee, the Service Provider Working Group
created in Section
16.128-11(e), the Disability and Aging Services Commission and the Board of
Supervisors. The plan shall be a public document.
      By March 1, DAAS shall complete a draft CNA and provide this draft to the
Oversight and Advisory Committee and the Service Provider Working Group for
review. DAAS shall also provide the draft CNA to interested City departments
and commissions, including but not limited to the Disability and Aging Services
Commission, the Mayor’s Office on Disability, the Long Term Care Coordinating
Council, the Human Services Commission, the Health Commission, the Recreation
and Park Commission, the Adult Probation Department, the Veterans Affairs
Commission, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Police Commission, the
Library Commission, and the Arts Commission. The CNA shall include an Executive
Summary and clear description of the categories of services provided and unmet
needs to be addressed.
      By April 1, DAAS shall submit a final version of the CNA to the
Disability and Aging Services Commission and the DAAS Advisory Council. The
final version of the CNA may incorporate any comments or suggestions made by
the Oversight and Advisory Committee, the public, or the agencies that received
copies of the draft CNA. The Disability and Aging Services Commission and the
Oversight and Advisory Committee shall hold a joint public hearing to review
the CNA.
      By May 1, the Disability and Aging Services Commission shall provide
input on and approve or disapprove the CNA. If the Disability and Aging
Services Commission disapproves the report, DAAS may modify and resubmit the
report.
      By June 1, the Board of Supervisors shall consider and approve or
disapprove, or modify, the CNA. If the Board disapproves the CNA, DAAS may
modify and resubmit the CNA, provided, however, that the City may not expend
monies from the Fund until the Board of Supervisors has approved the CNA.
   (c)   Year 2 – Services and Allocation Plan. Beginning in fiscal year 2018-
2019 and during every fourth fiscal year thereafter, DAAS, in consultation with
the Oversight and Advisory Committee, shall prepare a Services and Allocation
Plan (“SAP”) to determine services that will receive monies from the Fund. All
services identified in Section
16.128-4 are potentially eligible to receive funding, but DAAS is not required
to classify allocations according to the service categories in that section.
DAAS shall use the following process to prepare the SAP:
      (1)   DAAS shall disseminate a draft SAP to interested City departments
and commissions, including but not limited to the Disability and Aging Services
Commission, the Mayor’s Office on Disability, the Long Term Care Coordinating
Council, the Human Services Commission, the Health Commission, the Recreation
and Park Commission, the Adult Probation Department, the Commission on the
Status of Women, the Police Commission, the Library Commission, and the Arts
Commission. In preparing the draft SAP, DAAS shall confer with the Department
of Children, Youth and Their Families to coordinate funding for services for
Transitional-Aged Youth, as defined in Charter Section
16.108(e), with Disabilities from both the Dignity Fund and the Children and
Youth Fund.
         The SAP must:
         (A)   Demonstrate consistency with the CNA and with Citywide vision
and goals for the Fund;
         (B)   Include all services for Seniors and Adults with Disabilities to
secure and utilize the services and support necessary to age with dignity in
their own homes and communities;
         (C)   Be outcome-oriented and include goals and measurable and
verifiable objectives and outcomes;
         (D)   Include capacity-building and evaluation of services as separate
funding areas;
         (E)   State how services will be coordinated and have specific amounts
allocated towards specific goals, service models, populations, and
neighborhoods;
         (F)   Include funding for neighborhood-initiated projects totaling at
least 3% of the total proposed expenditures from the Fund for the four-year
planning cycle established in this Section
16.128-6;
         (G)   Include funding for pilot programs to develop and test new and
innovative programs, in an amount not to exceed 3% of the total proposed
expenditures from the Fund for the cycle;
         (H)   Include funding for an undesignated contingency reserve, in an
amount not to exceed 2% of the total proposed expenditures from the Fund for
the cycle;
         (I)   Include, as a separate line item, an allocation of funds
required for the preparation, monitoring, and evaluation of the CNA and SAP
required under this Section
16.128-6 and the Evaluation and Data Report required under Section
16.128-7;
         (J)   Include evaluation data from the previous funding cycle; and
         (K)   Incorporate strategies to coordinate and align services for
Seniors and Adults with Disabilities funded by all governmental or private
entities and administered by the City, whether or not those services are
eligible to receive monies from the Fund.
      (2)   The SAP shall reference the gap analysis and equity analysis of
services and resources for Seniors, Adults with Disabilities, and their
caregivers included in the CNA. Using the equity metrics developed for
preparation of the CNA, the SAP shall compare proposed new, augmented, and
coordinated services and resources for low-income and moderate-income
neighborhoods and disadvantaged communities with services and resources
available to the City as a whole.
      (3)   Subject to the budgetary and fiscal provisions of the Charter, DAAS
may contract with consultants and outside experts for such services as the
Department may require to prepare the SAP, including the equity analysis of
services and resources for Seniors, Adults with Disabilities, and their
caregivers.
      (4)   The Board of Supervisors shall by ordinance outline the timeline
for the development of the Services and Allocation Plan. Prior to completion of
the first SAP and while the first planning cycle is in process, DAAS, in
consultation with the Oversight and Advisory Committee, may expend monies from
the Fund based on existing needs assessment analysis.
   (d)   Years 3 and 4 – Selection of Contractors. Beginning with Fiscal Years
2019-2020 and 2020-2021 and during every fourth fiscal year thereafter, DAAS
shall conduct competitive solicitations for services to be funded from the
Fund. Requests for proposals will be grouped by issue area and spread out on a
schedule known in advance to provide for a smooth and efficient timeline. The
Human Services Agency and the Department of Disability and Aging Services shall
work together and manage resources so that the RFP process will keep to the
schedule and contract awards will be made within a reasonable time.
   (e)   Years 3 and 4 – Service Cycle Begins. Contracts for services shall
start on July 1, beginning with Fiscal Year 2019-2020. During subsequent years
of the four-year planning cycle established in this Section
16.128-6, DAAS, with the consultation and input of the Oversight and Advisory
Committee, may issue supplemental competitive solicitations to address
amendments to the SAP and emerging needs.
   (f)   DAAS may recommend, and the Oversight and Advisory Committee and the
Board of Supervisors may approve, changes to the due dates and timelines
provided in this Section
16.128-6. The Board of Supervisors shall approve such changes by ordinance.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016; Amended by Proposition_B, Approved
11/5/2019)
SEC. 16.128-7. EVALUATION.
   DAAS shall provide for the evaluation on a regular basis of all services
funded through the Fund, and shall prepare on a regular basis an Evaluation and
Data Report for the Oversight and Advisory Committee. Subject to the budgetary
and fiscal provisions of the Charter, DAAS may contract with consultants and
outside experts for such services as the Department may require to conduct such
evaluations and to prepare the Evaluation and Data Report. This evaluation
process is intended to be reasonable in scope and to build on and strengthen
existing program evaluations.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016)
SEC. 16.128-8. SELECTION OF CONTRACTORS.
   The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall recommend standards and
procedures for the selection of contractors to be funded from the Fund. It
shall be the policy of the City to use competitive solicitation processes where
appropriate and to give priority to the participation of non-profit agencies.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016)
SEC. 16.128-9. IMPLEMENTATION.
   (a)   The Board of Supervisors may by ordinance implement Sections
16.128-1 through
16.128-12.
   (b)   In implementing Sections
16.128-1 through
16.128-12, primary goals shall include facilitating public participation and
maximizing availability of information to the public.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016)
SEC. 16.128-10. EFFECT OF PROCEDURAL ERRORS.
   No appropriation, contract, or other action shall be held invalid or set
aside by reason of any error, including without limitation any irregularity,
informality, neglect, or omission, in carrying out procedures specified in
Sections
16.128-1 through
16.128-12, unless a court finds that the party challenging the action suffered
substantial injury from the error and that a different result would have been
probable had the error not occurred.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016)
SEC. 16.128-11. ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (a)   Creation. There shall be a Dignity Fund Oversight and Advisory
Committee (“Oversight and Advisory Committee”) to monitor and participate in
the administration of the Dignity Fund as provided in Charter Sections
16.128-1 et seq., and to take steps to ensure that the Fund is administered in
a manner accountable to the community.
   (b)   Responsibilities.
      (1)   The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall develop recommendations
for DAAS and the Fund regarding outcomes for services to Seniors and Adults
with Disabilities, the evaluation of services, common data systems, a process
for making funding decisions, program improvement and capacity-building of
service providers, community engagement in planning and evaluating services,
leveraging dollars of the Fund, and the use of the Fund as a catalyst for
innovation. The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall promote and facilitate
transparency and accountability in the administration of the Fund and in the
planning and allocation process.
      (2)   As provided in Section
16.128-6, the Oversight and Advisory Committee shall provide input into the
planning process for the Community Needs Assessment (“CNA”) and the final CNA,
the Services and Allocation Plan, and the over-all spending plan for the Fund
to be presented to the Disability and Aging Services Commission, and shall
review the annual Data and Evaluation Report. Nothing in this Section
16.128-11 shall limit the authority of the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors
to propose, amend, and adopt a budget under
Article IX of the Charter.
      (3)   The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall establish and maintain a
Service Provider Working Group as provided in subsection (e).
      (4)   The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall meet at least six times
a year.
   (c)   Composition. The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall have 11
members. The Disability and Aging Services Commission shall appoint two of its
members to the Oversight and Advisory Committee. The Advisory Council to the
Department of Disability and Aging Services shall appoint three of its members
to the Oversight and Advisory Committee. And the Long Term Care Council shall
appoint three of its members to the Oversight and Advisory Committee. The Mayor
shall appoint the remaining three at-large members of the Oversight and
Advisory Committee, subject to rejection by the Board of Supervisors within 30
days following transmittal of the Notice of Appointment.
      The appointing authorities shall appoint the initial members by February
1, 2017. The terms of the initial appointees to the Committee shall commence on
the date of the first meeting of the Committee, which may occur when at least
eight members have been appointed and are present.
   (d)   Implementation. The Board of Supervisors shall further provide by
ordinance for the membership, structure, functions, appointment criteria,
terms, and administrative and clerical support of the Oversight and Advisory
Committee. The Board of Supervisors shall adopt such legislation to be
effective by January 1, 2017.
   (e)   Service Provider Working Group. The Oversight and Advisory Committee
shall create a Service Provider Working Group (“Working Group”) to advise the
Oversight and Advisory Committee on funding priorities, policy development, the
planning cycle, evaluation design and plans, and any other issues of concern to
the Working Group related to the Fund or the responsibilities of DAAS or other
departments receiving monies from the Fund. The Working Group shall engage a
broad cross-section of service providers in providing information, education,
and consultation to the Oversight and Advisory Committee. All members of the
Working Group shall be actively providing services to Seniors, Adults with
Disabilities, and their caregivers. DAAS staff shall provide administrative and
clerical support to the Working Group. The Working Group shall meet at least
four times a year. The Oversight and Advisory Committee shall appoint two
initial co-chairs of the Working Group, who shall be responsible for developing
the structure of the Working Group and facilitating the meetings. After the
terms of the initial co-chairs expire, the Working Group shall select its own
chairs. Working Group meetings shall be open to the public and encourage
widespread participation.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016; Amended by Proposition_B, Approved
11/5/2019)
SEC. 16.128-12. SUNSET.
   The provisions of Sections
16.128-1 through
16.128-12 shall expire at the end of Fiscal Year 2036-37.
(Added by Proposition I, Approved 11/8/2016)
SEC. 16.128-13. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
   (a)   The City Attorney shall cause all references in the Municipal Code to
the Aging and Adult Services Commission, the Department of Aging and Adult
Services, and the Aging and Adult Services Community Living Fund to be amended
to refer to the Disability and Aging Services Commission, the Department of
Disability and Aging Services, and the Disability and Aging Services Community
Living Fund, respectively.
   (b)   Upon completion of the amendments required by subsection (a), the City
Attorney shall cause this Section
16.128-13 to be removed from the Charter.
(Added by Proposition_B, Approved 11/5/2019)
SEC. 16.129. STREET TREE MAINTENANCE.
   (a)   Definitions. For purposes of this Section 16.129:
      “City” shall mean the City and County of San Francisco.
      “Maintenance” (and its root “Maintain”) shall mean those actions
necessary to promote the life, growth, health, or beauty of a Tree. Maintenance
includes both routine maintenance and major maintenance. Routine maintenance
includes adequate watering to ensure the Tree’s growth and sustainability; weed
control; removal of Tree-well trash; staking; fertilizing; routine adjustment
and timely removal of stakes, ties, Tree guards, and Tree grates; bracing; and
Sidewalk repairs related to the Tree’s growth or root system. Major maintenance
includes structural pruning as necessary to maintain public safety and to
sustain the health, safety, and natural growth habit of the Tree; pest and
disease-management procedures as needed and in a manner consistent with public
health and ecological diversity; and replacement of dead or damaged Trees.
Pruning practices shall be in compliance with International Society of
Arboriculture Best Management Practices and ANSI Pruning Standards, whichever
is more protective of Tree preservation, or any equivalent standard or
standards selected by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
      “Planting” shall mean putting or setting into the ground or into a
container to grow, and irrigating until self-sufficient.
      “Removal” shall mean any intentional or negligent moving, carrying away,
elimination, or taking away of part or all of a Tree.
      “Sidewalk” shall mean the area between the curbing and the abutting
private property lot line, whether paved or unpaved, as legislated by the Board
of Supervisors and as reflected in the official maps of the Department of
Public Works.
      “Street Tree” shall mean any Tree growing within the public right-of-way,
including unimproved public streets and Sidewalks, and any Tree growing on land
under the jurisdiction of the Department of Public Works. “Street Tree” does
not include any other forms of landscaping.
      “Tree” shall mean any perennial, woody or fibrous plant species or
cultivar, which reaches a height exceeding 10 feet at maturity, and which
supports a branched or un-branched leaf canopy.
   (b)   City Responsibility to Maintain Street Trees. Beginning on July 1,
2017, and except as otherwise required by supervening law, the City shall be
responsible for Maintaining Street Trees, including Street Trees planted both
before and after July 1, 2017. The City may not adopt any ordinance making it
the duty of owners of lots or portions of lots immediately abutting on,
fronting on, or adjacent to any Street Tree to Maintain such Street Tree on or
after July 1, 2017. Any such ordinance in existence on July 1, 2017, shall, to
the extent it conflicts with this Section
16.129, be void.
   (c)   Limitations of Transfer of Responsibility. Nothing in this Section
16.129 shall: (1) affect the rights or responsibilities of the City or property
owners with respect to the Removal, establishment, or relocation of a Street
Tree; (2) prevent the City from entering into voluntary agreements with third
parties for them to assume responsibility for Street Tree Maintenance or
continuing to abide by any such prior agreement; (3) prevent the City from
imposing any legally permitted penalties or fees on persons who injure, damage,
or destroy Trees; or (4) relieve abutting property owners from their
responsibility for the care and Maintenance of the Sidewalk and Sidewalk areas
adjacent to any Street Tree, other than the responsibility for Sidewalk repairs
related to the Tree’s growth or root system, which shall be the responsibility
of the City.
   (d)   Limitation of Liability. Beginning on July 1, 2017, any local law
imposing liability on property owners that do not Maintain Street Trees for
injury or property damage shall not apply to the extent that the injury or
property damage occurred on or after July 1, 2017, and was proximately caused
by the City’s failure to Maintain a Street Tree under this Section
16.129, but shall otherwise remain applicable. Nothing in this Section
16.129 shall be construed to impose liability on the City for injury or
property damage that occurred as a result of the property owner’s
responsibility to Maintain a Street Tree prior to July 1, 2017. To the extent
that the Maintenance of a Street Tree requires that the City access private
property, the City shall attempt in good faith to obtain permission from the
owner of the private property. If the owner refuses to grant the City
permission to access the private property for the purpose of Maintaining the
Street Tree, the City shall have no liability for any damages related to the
Maintenance of that Street Tree, and the property owner shall be subject to
liability for such damages.
   (e)   No later than April 1, 2017, the Department of Public Works shall
submit to the Board of Supervisors recommended amendments to Public Works Code
Article 16, including but not limited to Section 805, to conform to this
Section
16.129.
   (f)   Creating the Street Tree Maintenance Fund; Annual City Contributions.
There shall be a Street Tree Maintenance Fund (the “Fund”). Each fiscal year,
beginning in fiscal year 2017-2018, the City shall contribute $19 million to
the Fund. The Fund shall also include any other monies appropriated or
allocated to the Fund. Beginning in fiscal year 2018-2019, the Controller shall
adjust the amount of the City’s annual $19 million contribution to the Fund
under this subsection (f) by the percentage increase or decrease in aggregate
City discretionary revenues, as determined by the Controller, based on
calculations consistent from year to year. In determining aggregate City
discretionary revenues, the Controller shall only include revenues received by
the City that are unrestricted and may be used at the option of the Mayor and
the Board of Supervisors for any lawful City purpose. Additionally, in
determining aggregate City discretionary revenues, the Controller shall not
include revenues received by the City under the increased rates in Business and
Tax Regulations Code Sections 953.1(g), 953.2(h), 953.3(h), 953.4(e), 953.5(d),
953.6(f), 953.7(d), and 953.8(i) adopted by the voters at the general municipal
election on November 3, 2020, and shall not include revenues received by the
City under Article 36 of the Business and Tax Regulations Code adopted by the
voters at the general municipal election on November 3, 2020. The change in
aggregate discretionary revenues will be adjusted following the end of the
fiscal year when final revenues are known. The Controller is authorized to
increase or reduce budgetary appropriations as required under this subsection
(f) to reflect changes in aggregate discretionary revenues following the end of
the fiscal year when final revenues are known. The Controller shall set aside
and maintain the above amounts, together with any interest earned thereon, in
the Fund, which shall be subject to appropriation. Any amount unspent or
uncommitted at the end of the fiscal year shall be deemed to have been devoted
exclusively to a specified purpose within the meaning of Charter Section
9.113(a), shall be carried forward to the next fiscal year, and, subject to the
budgetary and fiscal limitations of this Charter, shall be appropriated then or
thereafter for the purposes set forth in this Section
16.129.
   (g)   Beginning in fiscal year 2018-2019, the City may suspend growth in the
City’s $19 million contribution to the Fund under subsection (f) of this
Section
16.129 if the City’s projected budget deficit for the upcoming fiscal year at
the time of the Joint Report or Update to the five-year financial plan as
prepared jointly by the Controller, the Mayor’s Budget Director, and the Board
of Supervisors’ Budget Analyst exceeds $200 million adjusted annually by
changes in aggregate discretionary revenues as defined in subsection (f) of
this Section
16.129.
   (h)   Administration and Use of the Fund. The Department of Public Works
shall administer the Fund. Monies in the Fund shall only be used for the
following purposes:
      (1)   Maintenance and Removal of Street Trees;
      (2)   Necessary costs of administering the Fund; and
      (3)   Making grants totaling up to $500,000 annually to the San Francisco
Unified School District exclusively to fund Maintenance and Removal of Trees on
School District property.
      Monies in the Fund shall not be used for Planting new Street Trees, or
for grants to the San Francisco Unified School District for the Planting of new
Trees on School District property, but may be used to pay the costs of
Maintaining and Removing Street Trees that were planted before or after July 1,
2017, and to make grants to the School District to Maintain and Remove Trees
that were planted before or after July 1, 2017.
   (i)   Annual Reports. Commencing with a report filed no later than January
1, 2019, covering the fiscal year ending June 30, 2018, the Department of
Public Works shall file annually with the Board of Supervisors, by January 1 of
each year, a report containing the amount of monies collected in and expended
from the Fund during the prior fiscal year, and such other information as the
Director of the Department of Public Works, in the Director’s sole discretion,
shall deem relevant to the operation of this Section
16.129 .
   (j)   Early Termination. At any time before January 1, 2017, the Mayor,
after consulting with his or her Budget Director and the Controller, and after
taking into account the City’s projected revenues and expenditures in the
City’s financial plans, may terminate implementation of this Section
16.129 by issuing a written notice to the Board of Supervisors and the
Controller. The termination shall be irrevocable and apply to this entire
Section. Upon the Mayor’s submittal of the notice to the Controller and the
Board of Supervisors, this Section
16.129 shall, by operation of law, become inoperative, and the City Attorney
shall cause this Section to be removed from the Charter.
(Added by Proposition E, Approved 11/8/2016; amended by Proposition_B, Approved
11/3/2020; Proposition_F, Approved 11/3/2020; Proposition_B, Approved 11/8/
2022)
SEC. 16.130. PRIVACY FIRST POLICY.
   (a)   The principles stated in subsection (e) of this Section
16.130 constitute the Privacy First Policy of the City and County of San
Francisco (“City”) and are intended to provide guidance to the City when
considering the adoption of privacy-protective laws, regulations, policies, and
practices for the City; the City’s contractors, lessees, and grantees; third
parties receiving permits, licenses, or other entitlements from the City; and
persons (including businesses and other entities) within the regulatory
authority of the City.
   (b)   All parts of City government, including but not limited to boards,
commissions, departments, other bodies, and officials, are authorized to
implement any or all of these principles consistent with other provisions of
the Charter, including this Section
16.130, and City law.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subsection (b), and notwithstanding any other
provision of the Charter, the Board of Supervisors shall have authority by
ordinance to implement these principles as it deems appropriate. This authority
includes imposing requirements that implement any or all of these principles on
any or all City boards, commissions, departments, other entities, and
officials, and on any or all contractors, lessees, grantees, third parties
receiving permits, licenses, or other entitlements, or others, within the
jurisdiction of said boards, commissions, departments, other entities, and
officials.
   (d)   For purposes of the Privacy First Policy, “Personal Information” means
any information that identifies, relates to, describes, or is capable of being
associated with, a particular individual. Personal Information includes, but is
not limited to, an individual’s name, signature, social security number,
physical characteristics or description, address, geolocation data, IP address,
telephone number, passport number, driver’s license or state identification
card number, insurance policy number, education, employment, employment
history, bank account number, credit card number, debit card number, or any
other financial information, medical information, genetic and biometric data,
or health insurance information.
   (e)   When considering the adoption of privacy-protective laws, regulations,
policies, and practices, the City shall:
      (1)   Engage with and inform individuals and communities likely to be
impacted by the collection, storage, sharing, or use of their Personal
Information prior to authorizing and prior to any change regarding the
collection, storage, sharing, or use of their Personal Information.
      (2)   Ensure that Personal Information is only collected, stored, shared,
or used pursuant to a lawful and authorized purpose.
      (3)   Allow individuals to access Personal Information about themselves
that has been collected, and provide access and tools to correct any inaccurate
Personal Information.
      (4)   Solicit informed consent to the collection, storage, sharing, or
use of Personal Information, and provide alternative and equal access to goods
and services for those who deny or revoke consent.
      (5)   Discourage the collection, storage, sharing, or use of Personal
Information, including Personal Information that may identify an individual’s
race, religion or creed, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, age,
physical or mental disability, or other potentially sensitive demographic
information, unless necessary to accomplish a lawful and authorized purpose.
      (6)   De-identify data sets, when collected for research, statistical, or
other analytical purposes, thereby removing the ability to connect personal
characteristics with specific individuals, and implement technical safeguards
to prevent re-identification of information.
      (7)   Adopt and make public, or cause to be made public, policies and
practices for responding to requests or demands for Personal Information from
governmental entities.
      (8)   Allow individuals to move and organize throughout the City without
being tracked or located in a manner that subjects them to collection of
Personal Information without their consent.
      (9)   Evaluate and mitigate bias or inaccuracy in the collection,
storage, sharing, or use of Personal Information, and anticipate potential bias
in secondary uses of and algorithms used in connection with Personal
Information.
      (10)   Retain Personal Information for only as long as necessary to
accomplish a lawful and authorized purpose.
      (11)   Secure Personal Information against unauthorized or unlawful
processing or disclosure; unwarranted access, manipulation, or misuse; and
accidental loss, destruction, or damage.
   (f)   In furtherance of the Privacy First Policy, the City Administrator, by
May 31, 2019, shall propose for consideration by the Board of Supervisors an
ordinance establishing criteria and rules that the City shall adhere to (1) in
the City’s own practices for the collection, storage, sharing, and use of
Personal Information; (2) when entering into contracts, grants, or leases with
third parties that are, or may in the future be, in a position to collect,
store, share, or use Personal Information in connection with or generated by
the contract, grant, or lease; and (3) when issuing permits, licenses, or other
entitlements that involve, or may in the future involve, collection, storage,
sharing, or use of Personal Information in connection with or generated by the
permit, license, or other entitlement. The proposed ordinance may also address
criteria and rules regarding collection, storage, sharing, and use of Personal
Information by persons (including businesses and other entities) within the
City’s regulatory authority. This subsection (f) shall not be construed to
restrict the authority of the Board of Supervisors at any time to adopt an
ordinance concerning the subjects that are or could be addressed by the City
Administrator in the proposed ordinance.
   (g)   No less frequently than every three years following the submission
under subsection (f) of the City Administrator’s proposed ordinance, the City
Administrator shall provide to the Board of Supervisors and the Mayor a written
report describing the City’s implementation of the Privacy First Policy;
describing new dimensions of collecting, storing, sharing, and using Personal
Information that may present a threat to privacy; and making such
recommendations as the City Administrator deems appropriate, including but not
limited to recommendations to adopt or amend ordinances regarding the
collection, storage, sharing, or use of Personal Information.
   (h)   The principles in subsection (e) underlying the Privacy First Policy
are not binding or self-executing but rather are intended as a guide to City
boards, commissions, departments, other bodies, and officials, and to the Board
of Supervisors, when considering the adoption of privacy-protective laws,
regulations, policies, and practices.
   (i)   The Privacy First Policy may not be implemented in a manner that is
inconsistent with voter-approved ordinances regarding privacy, open meetings,
or public records. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Charter, the
Board of Supervisors is authorized by ordinance to amend voter-approved
ordinances regarding privacy, open meetings, or public records, provided that
any such amendment is not inconsistent with the purpose or intent of the voter-
approved ordinance.
   (j)   The Privacy First Policy is not intended in any manner to limit the
power of the City to protect privacy by adopting laws, regulations, policies,
and practices within the City’s power, whether specified or not specified in
this Section
16.130.
   (k)   This Section
16.130 shall not apply to the extent, if any, its application is preempted by
federal or state law.
(Added by Proposition_B, Approved 11/6/2018)
SEC. 16.131. STUDENT SUCCESS FUND.
   (a)   Establishment of Fund. There is hereby established the Student Success
Fund (“the Fund”) to be administered by the Department of Children, Youth, and
Their Families (the “Department”), or any successor agency. Monies therein
shall be expended or used solely by the Department, subject to the budgetary
and fiscal provisions of the Charter, for the purposes set forth in this
Section
16.131.
   (b)   Purposes of Fund. The purpose of the Fund is to provide additional
resources to the San Francisco Unified School District (the “District”) to
accomplish grade-level success in core academic subjects and improve social/
emotional wellness for all District students. The Fund will encourage the
District to be innovative and creative in improving student outcomes in both
areas, so that successful programs may be scaled up. One model to achieve the
purposes of this Fund is the community school framework that has been
implemented across the country with proven outcomes in academic achievement and
student success.
      Using this framework, students, families, educators, and connected
community partners work together with school administrators in determining
strategies to serve students who are struggling at their schools, and integrate
partners inside and outside of the schools, such as City departments and
community-based organizations, to meet student and family needs in order to
increase student success and equity in and among schools. To help students
succeed in the classroom, this framework bolsters current resources available
in schools, and may include academic support, social/emotional interventions,
strategies to address persistent poverty and trauma, or support for families to
secure stability. Many of these needs can be met within the school by District
educators and support staff including but not limited to school nurses, in-
classroom tutors, literacy and math specialists, academic coaches, social
workers, specialized curriculum, and school psychologists. Other interventions
can be achieved with the assistance of community-based organizations and/or
City departments including but not limited to programs and assistance to
alleviate the impacts of poverty and/or trauma, after-school programming,
therapeutic arts and culture programing, and summer school.
      The Fund is born of a belief that students, parents, educators, and staff
of community-based organizations at individual schools are the best situated to
determine, within the District’s instructional and community schools framework,
the direct interventions and programming that are necessary to help all
students achieve academic success and social/emotional wellbeing at their
school. The community schools framework continuously monitors programs and
practices in each school community to ensure that strategies support student
progress and outcomes, and that the entire school community is part of that
work. The Fund is also born of a belief that it takes a village to successfully
educate students, and the involvement of more caring adults to help students
overcome challenges is a building block to their ultimate success.
   (c)   Definitions.
      “Core Staffing” shall mean the minimum classroom teacher staffing levels
required by the District’s collective bargaining agreement with the labor
organization representing teachers in the District. For the purposes of this
definition, Core Staffing also means the school principal.
      “Department” shall mean the Department of Children, Youth, and Their
Families, or any successor agency.
      “District” shall mean the San Francisco Unified School District.
      “Eligible School” shall mean a school in the District serving students at
one or more grade levels from pre-kindergarten through 12th grade. The Board of
Supervisors may, by ordinance, or the Department may, by regulation, establish
criteria or prerequisites for Eligible Schools to receive grants from the Fund.
If there is any conflict between an ordinance and a regulation as described in
the preceding sentence, the ordinance shall prevail.
      “Excess ERAF” shall mean the amount of remaining Educational Revenue
Augmentation Fund monies allocated to the General Fund in a fiscal year under
California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 97.2(d) (4)(B)(i)(III), as that
provision may be amended from time to time.
      “Fund” shall mean the Student Success Fund established by this Section
16.131.
      “School Site Council” shall mean a council established under California
Education Code Section 52852, as that provision may be amended from time to
time. The Board of Supervisors may by ordinance modify the meaning of the term
“School Site Council” for the purpose of this Section 16.131, provided that the
ordinance must require participation by parents, students, community members,
and school staff.
      “Significant Reduction” shall mean a decrease in the amount of Excess
ERAF from previous fiscal years such that the amount of anticipated Excess
ERAF, as determined by the Controller, in a fiscal year is either (1) 50% less
than the amount of Excess ERAF in the immediately preceding fiscal year or (2)
50% less than the amount of Excess ERAF in the fiscal year three years prior.
   (d)   Annual Appropriations to the Fund.
      (1)   In Fiscal Year 2023-2024, the City shall appropriate $11 million to
the Fund (an amount that is equivalent to approximately 3.1% of the anticipated
value of Excess ERAF for Fiscal Year 2023-24, as projected by the Controller on
June 1, 2022). In Fiscal Year 2024-2025, the City shall appropriate $35 million
to the Fund (an amount that is equivalent to approximately 9.4% of the
anticipated value of Excess ERAF for Fiscal Year 2024-25, as projected by the
Controller on June 1, 2022). In Fiscal Year 2025-2026, the City shall
appropriate $45 million to the Fund (an amount that is equivalent to
approximately 11.5% of the anticipated value of Excess ERAF for Fiscal Year
2025-26, as projected by the Controller on June 1, 2022). In Fiscal Year 2026-
2027, the City shall appropriate $60 million to the Fund (an amount that is
equivalent to approximately 14.6% of the anticipated value of Excess ERAF for
Fiscal Year 2026-27, as projected by the Controller on June 1, 2022).
      (2)   In each year from Fiscal Year 2027-2028 through Fiscal Year 2037-
2038, the City shall appropriate to the Fund an amount equal to the prior
year’s appropriation, adjusted by the percentage increase or decrease in
aggregate discretionary revenues, as determined by the Controller, based on
calculations consistent from year to year, provided that the City may not
increase appropriations to the Fund under this subsection (d)(2) by more than
3% in any fiscal year. In determining aggregate City discretionary revenues,
the Controller shall only include revenues received by the City that are
unrestricted and may be used at the option of the Mayor and the Board of
Supervisors for any lawful City purpose.
      (3)   Notwithstanding subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2), the City may freeze
appropriations to the Fund for any fiscal year after Fiscal Year 2023-2024 at
the prior year amounts when the City’s projected budget deficit for the
upcoming fiscal year at the time of the March Joint Report or March Update to
the Five Year Financial Plan as prepared jointly by the Controller, the Mayor’s
Budget Director, and the Board of Supervisors’ Budget Analyst exceeds $200
million, adjusted annually beginning with Fiscal Year 2023-2024 by the
percentage increase or decrease in aggregate City discretionary revenues, as
determined by the Controller, based on calculations consistent from year to
year. In any such fiscal year, the City also may in its discretion appropriate
to the Fund an amount less than the amount required by subsection (d)(1) or (d)
(2), as applicable, provided that the City must appropriate at least $35
million to the Fund in each such fiscal year.
      (4)   Notwithstanding subsections (d)(1), (d)(2), or (d)(3), if the
Controller determines that there will be a Significant Reduction in Excess ERAF
in any fiscal year after Fiscal Year 2023-2024, then the City shall not be
required to appropriate the full amount set forth in subsection (d)(1) or (d)
(2) for that fiscal year, but the City shall appropriate at least $35 million
to the Fund in that fiscal year, in the following manner and sequence: In any
such fiscal year, the City shall appropriate monies withdrawn from the separate
reserve account under subsection (d)(6) until that account has no remaining
funds. If there are no remaining funds in that reserve account, the City shall
appropriate monies withdrawn from the City’s Budget Stabilization Reserve
established under Charter Section 9.120. If there are no remaining funds in the
Budget Stabilization Reserve, the City shall appropriate monies withdrawn from
other budget reserve accounts established under Charter Section
9.120.
      (5)   If, at any election after November 8, 2022, the voters of the City
enact a special tax measure that dedicates funds for the purposes described in
this Section
16.131, the City may reduce the amount of appropriations in subsections (d)(1)
and (d)(2) in any subsequent fiscal year by the amount of special tax revenues
that the City appropriates for those purposes in that fiscal year.
      (6)   Reserve Account.
         (A)   The Controller shall establish a separate reserve account in the
Fund to facilitate additional appropriations and expenditures during fiscal
years described in subsections (d)(3) and (d)(4). In any fiscal year described
in subsection (d)(3) or (d)(4), the City may appropriate and expend funds from
this separate reserve account for the purposes permitted by this Section
16.131, provided that the total amount expended from the Fund in any fiscal
year shall not exceed the amount set forth for that fiscal year in subsection
(d)(1) or (d)(2).
         (B)   At the end of each fiscal year, the Controller shall deposit in
the separate reserve account any monies that were appropriated to the Fund
under subsection (d)(1) or (d)(2) but that remain uncommitted, provided that
the amount in the separate reserve account shall not exceed $40 million. The
Controller shall return to the General Fund any additional monies in the Fund
that remain uncommitted.
   (e)   Uses of the Fund to Support Community Schools. On a funding cycle
determined by the Department, the Department shall invite Eligible Schools and
the District to apply for grant funding to support academic achievement and
social/emotional wellness of students. The Department shall establish after
making reasonable efforts to consult with and reach mutual agreement with the
District, or the Board of Supervisors may establish by ordinance after
requesting input from the District, a simple and accessible grant funding
process. If there is any conflict between any ordinance and a regulation
described in the preceding sentence or in any other provision in this
subsection (e), the ordinance shall prevail.
      (1)   Criteria: The Department, after consultation with the District,
shall adopt criteria, and the Board of Supervisors may by ordinance adopt
criteria, establishing the qualifications for Eligible Schools to receive a
Student Success Grant or a Technical Assistance Grant, or for the District to
receive a District Innovation Grant in coordination with one or more Eligible
Schools. At minimum, to receive a Student Success Grant under subsection (e)
(2), each Eligible School, including Eligible Schools covered by a District
Innovation Grant, must meet the following criteria:
         (A)   The Eligible School must have a School Site Council that has
endorsed the Eligible School’s grant funding proposal and has committed to
supporting the implementation of the programs and/or staffing funded by the
grant.
         (B)   The Eligible School must have a full-time Community School
Coordinator, or must plan to hire and in fact hire a Community School
Coordinator, who will serve in a leadership role working alongside the Eligible
School’s principal in implementing the grant and ensuring that the programs
funded by the grant integrate with and enhance the Eligible School’s academic
programs, social/emotional supports, and other programming. If there is a
program or a community-based organization integrally connected to the Eligible
School that provides on-site services and support for students and their
families, including without limitation an after-school, Beacon, or other
program, the Community School Coordinator must fully integrate these programs
or organizations so they work together to enhance the academic learning and
social/emotional support that occurs during the regular school day. The
Community School Coordinator must participate in the School Site Council to
help it gain and maintain the skills and capacity to meaningfully reflect the
values of the school community and support the implementation of programs
funded by each Student Success Fund Grant. The District or the Eligible School
may pay for the Community School Coordinator with monies allocated through
Student Success Grants or Technical Assistance Grants.
         (C)   The Eligible School must agree to coordinate with City
departments and with the District’s administration to ensure that all
resources, strategies, and programs at the Eligible School best serve students
and their families. If the Eligible School implements initiatives that advance
the community school model but are not funded by a grant under the Fund (for
example, but without limitation, Beacon, ExCEL, or Promised Neighborhoods
programs, or other partnerships with community-based organizations), then the
Eligible School must demonstrate to the Department how programs supported by
the grant will coordinate with, align with, and share leadership with those
other initiatives. Eligible Schools’ initiatives should utilize the state-
mandated school plan to ensure a coherent approach and align resources
allocation with student outcomes in both academic achievement and social/
emotional wellness.
      (2)   Student Success Grants: The Department shall provide a Student
Success Grant to each Eligible School that the Department, after consultation
with the District, determines is capable of successfully implementing the
District’s instructional and community schools frameworks or other evidence-
based school improvement strategies, based on the school’s application. The
Department shall establish criteria, or the Board of Supervisors may establish
criteria by ordinance, to prioritize grants to schools demonstrating low
academic achievement and/or with a high number of vulnerable students,
including but not limited to English language learners, foster youth, students
eligible for free or reduced-price meals, homeless students, and students who
are otherwise vulnerable or underserved. To determine whether an Eligible
School has demonstrated low academic achievement, the Department shall rely on
ratings prepared by the State and/or the District. The Department may determine
the amount of each Student Success Grant, up to a maximum amount of $1 million
per fiscal year. In addition to other uses consistent with this Section
16.131, a Student Success Grant may fund the Eligible School’s staffing costs
associated with administering the programs funded by the grant, including the
Eligible School’s Community School Coordinator. The Department may develop a
process for working with Eligible Schools to determine alternative programs for
the use of grant funds where the Department finds that the Eligible School’s
initial proposal does not align with the Department’s criteria.
      (3)   Technical Assistance Grants: If the Department determines that an
Eligible School does not have the organizational capacity to implement a
community school model in the next fiscal year, the Department may award that
Eligible School a Technical Assistance Grant, which shall be a grant to provide
technical assistance to prepare and assist a school community and its School
Site Council to gain the skills and capacity to apply for additional grants in
future fiscal years.
      (4)   District Innovation Grants: The Department may also provide grants
to the District if the District applies for funding to plan or implement
innovative programs designed to enhance student achievement or social/emotional
wellness at an Eligible School or group of Eligible Schools. Such programs may
but need not be pilot programs. The Department may determine the amount of each
District Innovation Grant based on criteria adopted by the Department, or by
the Board of Supervisors by ordinance. Any such criteria shall prioritize
programs in Eligible Schools demonstrating low academic achievement and/or with
a high number of vulnerable students, including but not limited to English
language learners, foster youth, students eligible for free or reduced-price
meals, homeless students, and students who are otherwise vulnerable or
underserved.
      (5)   Restrictions on Uses of Student Success Grants and Technical
Assistance Grants: Eligible Schools may not use Student Success Grants or
Technical Assistance Grants to pay for the Eligible School’s or the District’s
costs to provide Core Staffing.
      (6)   School District Coordinator: Notwithstanding any other provisions
in this subsection (e), the Department shall not issue any grants to Eligible
Schools or the District unless the District has at least one full-time employee
or full-time employee equivalent dedicated to managing and coordinating the
community school framework District-wide, and providing training and support
for each Eligible School’s Community School Coordinator; or unless the District
is in the process of selecting and hiring a full-time employee to perform those
functions.
      (7)   Outcomes and Goal Measurement: The Department, in consultation with
the District, shall establish clearly defined goals and measurable outcomes for
each grant and for the interventions and programs supported by the Fund
overall. The Department, in consultation with the District, also shall
establish a report structure and template for Eligible Schools, the District,
and the Department to evaluate the effectiveness of those interventions and
programs. The Department’s compliance standards and evaluations for Eligible
Schools shall complement and align with those of existing evaluation
structures, such as, but not limited to, quality practices of the San Francisco
Beacon Initiative, 21st Century Community Learning Centers Program, and ExCel
After School Programs, and any new similar out-of-school programs that the
District may implement over time.
      (8)   Ordinances: The Board of Supervisors may enact ordinances setting
forth additional criteria, restrictions, procedures, or guidelines, including
but not limited to additional permissible or prohibited uses of grant funds.
   (f)   Uses of the Fund for Administration by City Departments and the
District. The City may appropriate up to 3.5% of the monies appropriated from
the Fund each fiscal year to City departments to implement this Section
16.131  and administer the grant programs. Additionally, the District may
retain up to 3.5% of each Student Success Grant or Technical Assistance Grant
to cover the District’s expenses to comply with the administrative,
implementation, and reporting requirements in this Section
16.131 .
   (g)   Reports. As a condition of each grant provided under this Section
16.131 , the Department shall require the District and Eligible School to
provide the Department with data documenting the student outcomes, both
academic and social/emotional, of the programs funded by the grants, to the
extent permitted by State and federal law. Based on this data and other
information available to the Department, the Department shall regularly assess
the outcomes of the grant programs to evaluate how they are serving students,
communities, and schools to meet the goals of improving student academic and
social/emotional wellness outcomes. Each year by no later than May 1, the
Department shall submit to the Mayor and the Board of Supervisors a report
covering the prior calendar year and providing information about the uses of
grants awarded under the Fund and data regarding outcomes from the grant
funding.
   (h)   Task Force. By no later than March 31, 2023, the Board of Supervisors
shall pass an ordinance establishing a task force to exist until at least July
31, 2024 with the purpose to provide advice to the Board and the Mayor
regarding potential future sources of revenue for the Fund, including a
potential special tax measure that would dedicate funds for the purposes
described in this Section
16.131 .
   (i)   Expiration. This Section
16.131  shall expire by operation of law on December 31, 2038, following which
the City Attorney may cause it to be removed from the Charter unless the
Section is extended by the voters.
(Added by Proposition_G, Approved 11/8/2022)
ARTICLE XVII:
DEFINITIONS
   For all purposes of this Charter, the following terms shall have the
meanings specified below:
   "Business day" shall mean any day other than a Saturday, Sunday or holiday
on which governmental agencies are authorized by law to close.
   "Confirm" or "confirmation" shall mean the approval by a majority of the
members of the Board of Supervisors.
   "Discrimination" shall mean violations of civil rights on account of race,
color, religion, creed, sex, national origin, ethnicity, age, disability or
medical condition, political affiliation, sexual orientation, ancestry, marital
or domestic partners status, gender identity, parental status, other non-merit
factors, or any category provided for by ordinance.
   "Domestic partners" shall mean persons who register their partnerships
pursuant to the voter-approved Domestic Partnership Ordinance.
   "Elector" shall mean a person registered to vote in the City and County.
   "For cause" shall mean the issuance of a written public statement by the
Mayor describing those actions taken by an individual as a member of a board or
commission which are the reasons for removal, provided such reasons constitute
official misconduct in office.
   “General municipal election” shall mean the election for local officials or
measures to be held in the City and County on the Tuesday immediately following
the first Monday in November in every year until and including 2022.
Thereafter, “general municipal election” shall mean the election for local
officials or measures to be held in the City and County on the Tuesday
immediately following the first Monday in November in all even-numbered years.
   "Initiative" shall mean (1) a proposal by the voters with respect to any
ordinance, act or other measure which is within the powers conferred upon the
Board of Supervisors to enact, any legislative act which is within the power
conferred upon any other official, board, commission or other unit of
government to adopt, or any declaration of policy; or (2) any measure submitted
to the voters by the Mayor or by the Board of Supervisors, or four or more
members of the Board.
   "Notice" shall mean publication (as defined by ordinance), and a
contemporaneous filing with the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors or other
appropriate office.
   "One-third," "a majority" or "two-thirds" of the Board of Supervisors or any
other board or commission of the City and County shall mean one-third, a
majority or two-thirds of all members of such board or commission.
   "Published" shall have the meaning ascribed to the term by the Board of
Supervisors by ordinance. The Board of Supervisors shall seek a recommendation
from the Clerk of the Board of Supervisors before adopting such an ordinance.
   "Referendum" shall mean the power of the voters to nullify ordinances
involving legislative matters except that the referendum power shall not extend
to any portion of the annual budget or appropriations, annual salary
ordinances, ordinances authorizing the City Attorney to compromise litigation,
ordinances levying taxes, ordinances relative to purely administrative matters,
ordinances necessary to enable the Mayor to carry out the Mayor's emergency
powers, or ordinances adopted pursuant to Section
9.106 of this Charter.
   "Special municipal election" shall mean, in addition to special elections
otherwise required by law, the election called by (1) the Director of Elections
with respect to an initiative, referendum or recall, and (2) the Board of
Supervisors with respect to bond issues, election of an official not required
to be elected at the general municipal election, or an initiative or
referendum.
   "Statewide election" shall mean an election held throughout the state.
   "Voter" shall mean an elector who is registered in accordance with the
provisions of state law.
(Amended November 2003; Proposition A, Approved 11/5/2009; Proposition D,
Approved 11/6/2012; Proposition_H, Approved 11/8/2022)
